We do this through close engagement with mobile money providers, providing the mobile industry with tools and insights to help deployments scale, as well as supporting the creation of enabling regulatory environments to facilitate digital financial inclusion. The programme also supports mobile money operators to implement interoperability of mobile money services, and to further develop the digital ecosystem by facilitating the integration of third parties to mobile money schemes.
We are delighted to share the annual State of the Industry Report on Mobile Money. In this cornerstone report, we highlight the latest trends and key data from the mobile money industry in 2015.
 The industry is expanding to better serve the needs of cross-border trade and regional economies. In 2015, there were 29 cross-border mobile money initiatives connecting 19 countriesand by volume, international remittances was the fasting growing product with 52% growth over last year.
However, there is more to be done. Although customers increasingly use mobile money, they continue to rely on a limited number of products. It is clear that we, as an industry, must do more to fulfil mobile money's promise to provide a range of affordable financial products and services to the underserved. For mobile money to reach its commercial and social impact potential, providers must invest in building the broader ecosystem and drive usage in new products and services. This will make mobile money more sustainable, profitable, and relevant to customers in the long term.
We hope you find this report useful and we encourage you to visit www.gsma.com/mobilemoney and follow @GSMAMMU.
Today, there are 411 million mobile money accounts globally. Moreover, mobile money is available in 85% of countries where the vast majority of the population lacks access to a formal financial institution. This is an extraordinary achievement, demonstrating the power of mobile, underpinned by the important role mobile network operators have played in building this industry.
 With an increasingly active customer base, further development of the mobile money ecosystem will be essential to diversify customer usage.
The full findings of the report provide a complete quantitative assessment of mobile financial services based on data collected though GSMA's annual Global Adoption Survey on Mobile Financial Services. In 2015, 107 mobile money providers from 67 countries participated in this survey.
2. More regulators are recognising the importance of creating an open and level playing field for mobile money services, although policy improvements are still required to ensure mobile financial services reach the full addressable market and achieve financial inclusion. In 2015, 51 of 93 countries have an enabling regulatory framework.
4. Agents remain the physical backbone and face of mobile money to digitise and disburse cash (versus ATMs, banks, etc.), representing more than 90.5% of the cash-in and cash-out footprint. They also account for a significant cost of doing business, with an average of 54.4% of the top 10 providers revenues going to agent commissions.
6. Mobile money providers processed just over a billion transactions in December 2015, which is more than double what PayPal processed globally. Furthermore, active mobile money customers conduct an average of 11.2 transactions per month and maintain a median account balance of US$ 4.70, both increases from 2014.
8. Cross-border transactions were the fastest growing product in 2015. Mobile money services offering International Money Transfer (IMT) saw the volume of cross-border remittances increase by 51.8%.
10. The majority of mobile money providers recognise the need for long-term investment in their service. In 2015, three-quarters of respondents maintained or increased their investment in mobile money over the previous year.
Mobile money continues to deepen financial inclusion and is available in six out of seven markets where less than 20% of people have an account at a financial institution.
Cross-border mobile money remittance initiatives expanded to 29 corridors in 2015, connecting 19 countries by the end of the year.
Mobile money continues to deepen financial inclusion. In 2015, the number of mobile money services increased to 271 in 93 countries. Moreover, according to World Bank data on global financial inclusion, mobile money services are available in 85% of countries where the number of people with an account at a financial institution is less than 20%.1 The analysis in this chapter is based on the data from the GSMA Mobile Money Deployment Tracker.
As the mobile money industry matures, the launch of new services has been slowing each year. In 2015, 13 new services were launched, compared to 30 services in 2014 and 58 services in 2013.
1. World Bank, Global Financial Inclusion Database (2015), Account at a financial institution (% age 15+) [2014].
An analysis earlier this year of common market characteristics in the region highlighted two market types. Type I markets have certain characteristics which make it difficult for financial services providers to reach underserved populations through traditional banking models.
Type II markets tend to share two major features. First, banks are deeply rooted in the economy and are strong contenders to become leaders in mobile financial services in their respective countries. Second, mobile operators and retailers have achieved high penetration levels and built strong customer relationships in their core business. Multiple strong contenders have emerged to provide financial services and, in some markets, mobile operators, banks, and retailers have partnered to leverage each other's assets. In others, entrenched interests or regulatory restrictions have resulted in partnership models that not all parties approve of. Regardless of the market dynamics, however, Type II markets tend to be more integrated with existing financial and retail infrastructure, often including access to national clearing and settlement systems. These markets include Brazil, Mexico and Panama.
This year, mobile network operators (MNOs) interconnected their services in three new markets Madagascar, Rwanda, and Thailand. This follows the implementation of interoperability in Indonesia, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, and Tanzania in 2014 and 2013 (see figure 3). Providers in the Philippines are also preparing to launch interoperability in 2016. Additionally, mobile money services in Bolivia, Peru and Mexicowhich are already interoperable with the banking sector are on their way to full account-to-account (A2A) interoperability in mobile money. By allowing customers to transact between different mobile money schemes, A2A interoperability aims to increase the value of mobile money for providers and customers alike, including a larger addressable market and enhanced customer experience.
In addition to greater industry collaboration within markets this year, there has also been collaboration between mobile money providers across borders. Cross-border mobile money remittances, whereby mobile money is both the sending and receiving channel for international remittances, gathered momentum in 2015.6 As of the end of December, the GSMA tracked at least 29 cross-border mobile money remittance corridors connecting 19 countries (see figure 4). A range of use cases is driving customer uptake, including regular and seasonal remittances from economic migrants, as well as cross-border trade.
6. These cross-border mobile money remittance initiatives are partnerships solely between mobile money providers. In this model, funds are transferred directly from the sender's mobile money account to the receiver's mobile money account, without the assistance of a traditional Money Transfer Operator (MTO) to provide the cash-out service on the receiver end.
In 2015 there were changes to regulation in 10 countries (Colombia, El Salvador, Ghana, Guinea, Kyrgyzstan, Morocco, Mozambique, Nigeria, Sierra Leone, and Tanzania) and within the WAEMU.
10. Simone di Castri (2015), "Is regulation holding back financial inclusion? A look at the evidence", GSMA Mobile Money.
The physical distribution of mobile money agents continues to grow, with 3.2 million registered agents, but active agents remain elusive for many providers. On average, 51.4% or 1.6 million agents are active globally.
The rise of smartphones and greater internet access could enhance how providers enable customers to access mobile money, but few have yet to successfully crack this opportunity.
This section analyses the two channels customers rely on to access mobile money. The first is the network of physical access points where customers can typically deposit cash into, or take cash out of, their mobile money account. These access points are primarily agents. The second is the technical access channelthe interface customers use to initiate transfers and payments directly on their mobile handsets.
where recent regulatory approval has given providers more flexibility in agent registration. In other regions, such as Southern Africa and Latin America & the Caribbean, agent activation is challenging for a range of reasons, including a restrictive regulatory environment, a lack of commercial investment, or a particularly complex market context. In some cases, mobile money providers partner with large retail chains, which has the effect of adding significant numbers of agents to their registered base before many of them become trained and activated.
However, there are regions growing from strength to strength. In 2014, the Mobile Money programme published a case study on the mobile money turnaround story in Cote d'Ivoire.14 In 2015, growth across West Africa was dramatic, with Burkina Faso, Mali, Ghana, and Cote d'Ivoire all contributing to the substantive regional turnaround. In 2015, year-on-year growth in active agents was 60.1%, which was twice the growth rate of any other region.
14. Claire Scharwatt (2014), "Mobile Money in Cote d'Ivoire: A turnaround story", GSMA Mobile Money for the Unbanked.
The challenge of activating agents remains important because agents remain the backbone of mobile money. Agent activation remains a challenge, with a persistent gap between registered and active agents reported since the GSMA's first Global Adoption Survey in 2011. However, agents are still the core of the mobile money system-moving cash both in and outand require ongoing operational management and investment.
A few forward-looking providers are refreshing their approach to who they recruit, and are considering the network benefits female agents could bring. In early 2015, the GSMA published new research calculating the gender gap in mobile access and usage, which found that closing the gender gap in mobile ownership and usage could add an additional US$ 170 billion to the industry by 2020.
providers operate in predominantly 'rural' markets,17 so in terms of commercial viability, rural means scale. In 2015, in partnership with Orange and Millicom, GSMA released new research on rural agents to provide greater clarity on how to create an active and sustainable agent network in areas lacking basic infrastructure (see text box 2).
Whether or not mobile money successfully reaches rural communities depends on the ability of providers to create, manage, and sustain an agent network within these communities.
 Local context matters, and data can help to prioritise areas for growth: In both Mali and Chad, economic context was a consistent predictor of success for rural agents, suggesting that prioritising growth by region has a higher return on investment than organic growth.
 Effective master agents can bridge the liquidity gap: Access to cash and e-money underpins most of the challenges of operating in rural or remote areas. In the absence of traditional banking, master agents become the critical liquidity line for agents who are otherwise disconnected. Poor management, lack of investment, or inadequate incentives from the provider to the master agent result in a lacklustre master agent managing lacklustre agents.
While app development is increasingly common, usage of mobile money apps remains low. According to the 2015 survey results, apps were the second most common channel offered by mobile money service providers after USSD, but only eight providers reported having more than 1,000 active accounts (90 days) and more than 15% of total transaction volumes through the app.
Smartphones will play an increasingly important role in the next generation of digital financial inclusion. Cheaper devices, innovative pricing models and data-ready mobile networks are contributing to an accelerated pace of smartphone adoption. The underlying trend suggests that for users, apps are becoming a basic necessity, not just an additional access option.
The second critical part of developing a sustainable app is security. Apps introduce a security trade-off, moving from a "walled" operator-driven channel, such as USSD, to apps in a smartphone with internet access. Malware, internet, and OS-based attacks could potentially compromise user data.
Mobile money providers around the globe take customer security very seriously, and app development discussions involve compromises between user experience, security and development costs.
Mobile money has significantly contributed to changing the financial inclusion landscape, particularly in Sub-Saharan Africa, where 19 markets have more mobile money accounts than bank accounts.
With 134 million 90-day active accounts, mobile money is nearing the same level of adoption as PayPal, which records 173 million active users globally. Although active rates have remained stable at 32.6%, the share of accounts with a positive balance reached 46% in June 2015, indicating a growing level of trust amongst mobile money users.
Evaluating the reach of mobile money is promising, but still challenging. A small but growing number of providers are reporting gender and rural/urban data; mobile money adoption in these underserved communities remained stable in 2015.
With a 31% increase in 2015, the number of registered mobile money accounts grew at nearly the same pace as in 2014 (33%), reaching a total of 411 million globally. This is almost 100 million new registered accounts in 2015.26 However, South Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa showed the strongest growth in adoption, accounting for 85% of all new accounts opened in 2015. In Sub-Saharan Africa, we see the majority of growth coming from outside the mature mobile money markets of East Africa63% of all accounts opened in Sub-Saharan Africa in 2015 were in Middle, West, and Southern Africa.
23. World Bank, Global Financial Inclusion Database (2015), Account at a financial institution (% age 15+) [2014].
26. The 2014 State of the Industry report estimated 299 million accounts in December 2014. This figure has subsequently been updated with reported data from the 2015 Global Adoption Survey. This updated figure for December 2014 is 315 million registered accounts.
For the last five years, the GSMA Global Adoption Survey of Mobile Financial Services has been capturing supply-side data from mobile money providers to assess the penetration of mobile money both at a regional and global scale. Conversely, the Global Findex survey provides demand-side information focusing on how the unbanked around the world manage their finances and plan for the future using different types of formal and informal financial services. Combining the findings from both surveys provides a comprehensive picture of how the mobile industry has helped to change the financial inclusion landscape and reach the unbanked via mobile money.
According to the Global Findex, the share of adults with an account increased by 11 percentage points globally, from 51% in 2011 to 62% in 2014. More specifically, 60% of adults globally had an account at a formal financial institution only, 1% had a mobile money account only, and 1% had both a mobile money account and an account at a formal financial institution. As a result, the number of unbanked fell from 2.5 billion in 2011 to 2 billion in 2014. In developing economies, the gender gap remains steady, with a nine percentage point difference: while 59% of men reported having an account in 2014, only 50% of women did.
While the increase in account adoption was mainly in financial institution accounts, Sub-Saharan Africa was the exception. In this region, mobile money accounts drove the growth in overall account penetration. The number of adults who had a mobile money account grew ten percentage points across the region to 34% in 2015. In East Africa, where mobile money accounts are most common, overall account penetration increased by nine percentage points, reaching 35% of overall account penetration in the region. This nine point growth is impressive considering the share of adults with an account at a formal financial institution has remained steady at 26% since 2011.
While only 2% of adults worldwide report having a mobile money account, the Global Findex data found that this reached 12% in Sub-Saharan Africa in 2014. Interestingly, only half of mobile money account owners in this region also have an account at a formal financial institution, indicating that for a large number of people in this region, mobile money has become a critical first step towards financial inclusion.
Outside Sub-Saharan Africa, mobile money account ownership remains low. The share of adults with a mobile money account is only 3% in South Asia, 2% in Latin America & the Caribbean, and less than 1% in all other regions.
Although active rates on a 90-day basis remained stable at 32.6%, the share of accounts with a positive balance reached 46% in June 2015, suggesting an increasing level of trust amongst mobile money users. In East Asia & Pacific, the number of accounts with a positive balance doubled between September 2014 and June 2015. This was the highest level of growth across all the regions. Of all the accounts globally which had a positive balance, the majority, were in South Asia (55.6%).
 Female customers - 39.2% of survey respondents reported the gender composition of their customer base. This is significantly higher than in previous years,30 indicating that a growing number of mobile money providers are tracking gender data. Among survey respondents who reported the percentage of female customers, the median value reached 37% in June 2015, with no significant change compared to previous years (39% in 2014 and 37% in 2013).
31. Usually defined by survey respondents as customers who have opened an account at an outlet located outside of the main cities of the country. Refer to footnote 17 for further information on definitions of rural.
Widespread lack of official identification documents (ID) tends to disproportionately affect women and girls in emerging markets. Missing birth registration certificates, often needed to obtain an ID, hamper numerous daily activities and means that women are missing out on education opportunities, health care, entitlement claims, and access to financial tools, among others.33 When it comes to mobile money, the lack of IDs necessary to open a mobile money account is generally recognised as a major barrier to increase the penetration of mobile money services among women. Indeed, women are significantly less likely than men to have national ID cards and the necessary documentation required to meet the traditional KYC requirements. Tiered KYC therefore represents a strong opportunity to increase the adoption of mobile money services among women.
However, the total number of mobile money OTC customers may actually be much higher, as these figures only account for formal OTC usage that mobile money providers can track.
The majority of the services (45%) are based in South Asia and 28% are based in Sub-Saharan Africa. OTC represents 14.4% of the total global value of transactions and person-to-person (P2P) transfers remain the predominant use case. Bill payments also remain a common OTC use case, and 57.5% of all bill payments by value were conducted via OTC in June 2015.
Until now, the rapid growth of formal OTC transactions had seemed a powerful hook to introduce customers to a new kind of transactional service. However, there is growing evidence that OTC transactions can be an enabler for mobile money accounts in some circumstances, as in the example of Pakistan above. Moreover, according to InterMedia's Financial Inclusion Insights data, similar evidence shows OTC as an entry point for accounts in Bangladesh, where 56% of all bKash account users reported making a transaction before signing up for an account. This evidence, coupled with the deceleration of OTC growth, is an exciting development and suggests there is now greater emphasis on account adoption. This migration trend is significant because accounts, more than OTC transactions, enable the development of an ecosystem and greater financial inclusion.
In 2015, the mobile money industry experienced consistent growth both in terms of total volume (27.3%) and total value (31.5%).
Cross-border mobile money remittances grew more than any other ecosystem product in terms of number of launches and volume of transactions. Providers offering cross-border mobile money remittances saw a 51.8% growth in volumes.
In the last 12 months, customers have been using mobile money more. While the overall growth in volumes is 27.3%, the average number of transactions per customer has also increased. In 2015, the average customer conducted 11.2 transactions per month (up from 10.3 in 2014).
The insights from both the GSMA Global Adoption Survey and mobile money provider case studies reveal how these use cases have the potential to accelerate network effects and transform mobile money into a payments ecosystem.
Bulk disbursements experienced one of the fastest growth rates in terms of value, increasing 48.4% in 2015 and translating into inflows worth US$ 670 million in December 2015. Government payments are leading the way: 64.7% of bulk disbursements were government-to-person (G2P), followed by business-to-person (B2P) at 32.1% and donor-to-person (D2P) at 3.2%.
Although bulk disbursements are an efficient way for providers to inject money into the ecosystem, the vast majority of these are cashed out. Providers need to ensure that money continues to circulate more in the ecosystem if they are to grow their revenues, and they should continue to create a compelling value proposition for other more frequent transactional services, including merchant payments.
The figure above explores the relationship between scale in bulk disbursements and agent network maturity. The graph shows that liquidity management problems are common amongst operators that have pushed scale in bulk disbursements without mature agent networks (less than one agent per 1,000 adults).
Four mobile money providers handle 79.6% of the total volume of merchant payments. These four providers also dominate overall market share in their GSM and mobile money markets.
38. The 2014 State of the Industry Report also highlighted this trend, where the top five merchant payment services accounted for 77.1% of all merchant payment transactions.
 Telenor & Tameer Bank's mobile money service, Easypaisa, and Mobilink's Mobicash service have partnered with a third party, Wemsoloperating under brand name Keenu. Currently, Easypaisa is live and Mobicash will follow. Keenu continues to acquire merchants and to date includes several hundred merchants who offer a full-fledged POS/ mPOS machines which accept NFC and card payments (both swipe and chip). The cost of the device is covered completely by Keenu, while the Merchant Discount Rate (MDR) is shared between the operators and Keenu.
Bank and mobile money interoperability is increasingly important. For deployments with functionality already in place, bank-to-mobile (B2M) transactions represent 4.5% of the total value entering the ecosystem.
 Banked mobile money customers are also sending money via P2P transfers to previously unbanked mobile money customers, closing the gap between these two worlds.
During 2015, the number of markets where mobile money customers can send and receive money from customers of other mobile money services increased to a total of seven markets. Apart from going live, significant momentum has built up in other markets that are now on the path to allowing customers to send P2P transactions across deployments, giving this group of interoperable markets truly global representation.
 Technical solutions and partners vary across markets. Central banks, local bank-owned switches, card payments companies and the mobile money providers are all capable of driving interoperability. Both switches and bilateral solutions are being used, and a recent GSMA case study on lessons from Tanzania and Pakistan illustrates the benefits and drawbacks of each.40 This in-depth review of inter-bank switches illustrates that the governance model, technical readiness, and commercial model of the existing inter-bank infrastructure needs to be addressed to become suitable for the mobile money industry.
 Customer transactions need to be real-time. Any solution for interoperability will need to offer this feature to mobile money users and all implementations to date have followed this rule.
In the past year, mobile money services have begun to look at new ecosystem use cases to drive customer activity. Transport payments are one transaction type with the potential to drive daily usage, but it presents unique constraints. Although part of the payments ecosystem, transport could be considered adjacent to the core mobile money business as it is often an online or offline service independent of mobile money, but which has the capacity to link to a core mobile money account. In 2015, mobile money providers tested transport as a means to build an ecosystem, both with and without a direct connection to a mobile money account. The Philippines and Nicaragua both illustrate how transport can become a means to build a more digital ecosystem.
To facilitate this, AFPI created beep, an offline stored value card which will be initially used for transport fee payments on Manila's Rail System. The NFC card storing the wallet is being issued by beep, with Globe and Smart releasing their own beep-powered cards. While the standard beep cards require no KYC process and are easily accessible to everyone, users that have a beep card released by Globe or Smart will soon have the option to top-up from a mobile money account. Following the rail system roll-out, customers will be able to use the card at a number of B2C business establishments around the metro lines by the middle of 2016. While the scope of the joint-venture between the Globe and Smart is the issuing and branding of cards and merchant acquisition, beep also has a strong social impact as it is estimated that approximately 70% of the 1.5 million daily travellers using the systems are unbanked and 50% of the travellers having a bank account, only have access to debit cards.
Transport, as an adjacent use case, could help encourage the everyday use of mobile money accounts. For providers that cannot rely on the core P2P business to drive the network effects required for mobile money, adjacent use cases are becoming more compelling. Transport, e-commerce, and credit will be increasingly relevant for mobile money adoption in markets where traditional financial services are more established and operators face stronger competition.
The majority of mobile money providers recognise the need to continue investing in the service long term. Three-quarters of respondents maintained or increased their investment in mobile money in 2015 over the previous year.
Revenues generated by mobile money grew by 40.3% (CAGR) in the year leading up to June 2015. Moreover, a greater proportion of MNO respondents report that mobile money is a significant revenue contributor to their overall business, as compared to 2014. In 2015, more than 70% of MNO-led mobile money services reported earning more than 1% of total revenues from mobile money, compared to 50% the previous year.
Agent commissions continue to represent the biggest cost category for providers. In 2015, the top 10 mobile money providers (ranked by 90-day active accounts) paid out on average 54.4% of revenues as agent commissions.
The evolution of the business model in mobile money is becoming increasingly critical against the broader landscape of payments and fintech. Although fintech represents a much larger pool of products and services beyond mobile money, the growth in fintech investments will have an impact - particularly on the competitive landscape. Globally, fintech investments have tripled in the last year from US$ 4.05 billion in 2013 to US$ 12.21 billion in 2014.45 Although the vast majority of this is focused on developed markets for banked consumers, there is increasing interest in global markets. The volumes of these investments demonstrate that the landscape of who and where mobile money could be offered is changing.
Revenues generated by mobile money grew by 40.3% (CAGR) in the year leading up to June 2015, comparable to the annualised growth rate of mobile money transaction values over the same period. Twelve respondents more than doubled their revenues between September 2014 and June 2015. More than half (58.3%) of these deployments were in West and Middle Africa, where mobile money adoption and usage is rapidly gaining traction.
Taking a closer look at the 43 mobile network operators that provided revenue data, there is evidence that mobile money is growing steadily as a percentage of total company revenues. A greater proportion of MNO-led deployments report that mobile money is a significant revenue contributor to their overall business, as compared to 2014. In 2015, 72.1% (31 of 43) of MNO-led respondents reported earning more than 1% of total revenues from mobile money. The proportion of respondents earning less than 1% of total revenues from mobile money has dropped significantly since 2013 (from 50% in 2013 and 2014 to 28% in 2015). Encouragingly, 25.6% of the MNO-led (11 of 43) deployments reported earning more than 10% of total revenues from mobile money.
47. Recurring (service) revenue generated from value-added services (VAS) in the period, expressed as a percentage of recurring (service) revenue, GSMA Intelligence data, Q3 2013 - Q2 2014.
Nevertheless, there are cases where total revenues from mobile money decreased over the last year. Difficult macroeconomic conditions and currency devaluations in many emerging markets have negatively affected financial statements across multiple business units.50 Eleven mobile money providers in our sample report a decline in USD revenue in June 2015 compared to September 2014. This group of providers is highly diverse in terms of geography, length of operations, and business models.
The majority of respondents (76.5%) still derive most of their revenue from customer fees. However, this is less pronounced in Latin America & the Caribbean and Asia, where a greater proportion of respondents report obtaining the majority of revenues from business fees. 12 out of 85 providers (14.1%) report most of their revenues comes from business fees. Six of these are in South Asia, four in Latin America & the Caribbean, and two in East Asia & Pacific. Only one deployment reports getting most of its revenue from government fees.
Additional considerations for revenue generation include commercial decisions on pricing models, as well as regulatory provisions relating to pricing and float income.
50. Foreign exchange variations between Q3 2014 and Q3 2015 are significant: 18.6-25.7% decrease in Chad, Ghana, Senegal and Tanzania, and a 51.6% decrease in Colombia. As reported by Millicom Q3 2015 Results.
Regulation also influences the revenue generation potential of mobile money services. In particular, regulatory provisions on float income, or revenue earned on outstanding e-money liabilities, can affect the overall business case for mobile money. Regulation often restricts how revenues from float can be utilised, which means its net impact on overall profitability can vary greatly across markets.
2. Interest earned on the float may only be used in a manner that directly benefits mobile money customers: e.g., Liberia, where the Central Bank must approve the provider's proposal for how to use the funds to directly benefit customers.
4. Most of the interest earned on the float must be passed on to customers: e.g., Ghana requires providers to pass on 80% of interest (net of administrative fees related to the trust accounts).
6. Interest earned on the float may be used as mobile money providers see fit: e.g., India, where payments banks can earn interest on government securities and funds stored in banks, but they are not required to pay it out to consumers.
For mobile network operators, the indirect benefits of mobile money-churn reduction, uplifts in average revenue per user on the GSM business, or savings on airtime distribution-can be significant and help to strengthen the overall business case for mobile money services.
By contrast, the majority of MNO respondents in 2014 sold less than 1% of their total airtime via their mobile money services (see figure 13).
53. 10,627,538,000 KSH (USD 103.8 million) of airtime seller commissions were paid in total by Safaricom in 2015 (assuming that Safaricom only pays airtime seller commission on the 62% of airtime it did not sell via M-PESA). We estimate that each percentage of airtime sold costs Safaricom 171,411,903 KSH (USD 1.7 million).
Each year, the GSMA's Mobile Money programme publishes a State of the Industry Report on Mobile Financial Services, enabling readers to track the development of the MFS industry over time.
Now established in the majority of emerging economies, mobile money is a maturing industry serving new business areas and enabling a wider range of digital payments. Mobile money has become a core product offering for many mobile network operators (MNOs), who have unique assets and incentives to deliver these services in a sustainable and scalable way, namely trusted brands, widespread distribution, and secure channel access.
This report provides a quantitative assessment of the state of the mobile financial services industry based on GSMA data from the Mobile Money Deployment Tracker, the 2015 Global Adoption Survey of Mobile Financial Services, and Mobile Money Estimates & Forecasts.
A total of 107 service providers from 67 countries participated in the 2015 survey, and an additional 48 on mobile insurance, and 17 on mobile credit and savings. The full list of survey participants is included in Appendix A.
For some metrics, GSMA Mobile Money uses data modelling to estimate and forecast these figures, making information available for the entire industry rather than only survey participants. The methodology used to model these metrics is based on a mix of bottom-up (service level) and top-down (country level) approaches. A number of data sources, including the Global Adoption Survey of Mobile Financial Services, the GSMA Mobile Money Deployment Tracker, central bank reports, and the International Monetary Fund's (IMF) annual Financial Access Survey (FAS), are used in the estimates and forecasts models.
These estimates and forecasts will be updated on a regular basis to reflect the evolution of the industry, in particular the launch of new mobile money services, changes to regulation, and the evolution of market dynamics.
Survey data - Survey data is self-reported and has not been verified independently by the GSMA. Before data is entered, it is thoroughly checked for what is included and excluded, as well as how the metric is defined by the participant. Data is also cross-checked against regional benchmarks and other data sources.
 The service must rely heavily on a network of transactional points outside bank branches and ATMs which make the service accessible to unbanked and underbanked people. Customers must be able to use the service without having been previously banked. Mobile banking services which offer the mobile phone as just another channel to access a traditional banking product, and payment services linked to a current bank account or credit card, such as Apple Pay and Google Wallet, are not included.
 The service must allow underserved people to access insurance services easily using a mobile device. Services which offer the mobile phone as just another channel for the clients of an insurance company to access a traditional insurance product are not included.
 The service must allow underserved people to save money using a mobile device. Services which offer the mobile phone as just another channel to access a traditional savings account are not included.
 The service must allow underserved people to apply for credit and repay it more easily using a mobile device. Airtime credit products or services which offer the mobile phone as just another channel to access a traditional credit product are not included.
Bank account-to-mobile money account transfer A direct transfer of funds made from a customer bank account to a mobile money account. This transaction typically requires a commercial agreement and technical integration between the bank and the mobile money provider to allow direct account-to-account (A2A) transfers.
 over-the-counter to a biller or a billing organisation via a mobile money platform in exchange for services provided.
 person's mobile money account. For example: salary payments made by an organisation to an employee's mobile money account (B2P: business-to-person), payments made by a government to a recipient's mobile money account (G2P), or payments made by development organisations to beneficiaries (D2P).
Cash-out The process by which a customer deducts cash from their mobile money account. This is usually via an agent who gives the customer cash in exchange for a transfer of e-money from the customer's mobile money account.
Enabling regulation An 'enabling regulatory approach' for mobile money is one in which the rules established by the regulator57  Permit non-banks to issue electronic money (or equivalent)58 by allowing them to:  be licensed directly, OR  set up a subsidiary for this business, OR  apply for a payments bank (or equivalent) licence, OR  provide the mobile money service under a letter of noobjection to the non-bank or its partner bank, pending the approval of a specific regulation,  AND imposes initial and ongoing capital requirements that are proportional to the risks of the e-money business,  AND permits them to use agents for cash-in and cash-out operations,  AND does not prescribe the implementation of specific interoperability models without allowing for a market-led approach.
Float The balance of e-money, physical cash, or money in a bank account that an agent can immediately access to meet customer demands to purchase (cash-in) or sell (cash-out) electronic money.
Informal financial services Financial services offered by unregulated entities. Examples of informal financial services are 'susu' collections in Ghana, 'loan shark' lending, savings groups, etc.
Interoperability The ability for customers to undertake money transfers between two accounts at different mobile money schemes, or to transfer money between accounts at mobile money schemes and accounts at banks. To date, MNOs in seven markets have interoperated their mobile money schemes.
A payment made from a mobile money account via a mobile money platform to a retail or online merchant in exchange for goods or services.
 The service allows subscribers to borrow a certain amount of money which they agree to repay within a specified period of time.
 The service must offer an interface for initiating transactions for agents and/or customers which is available on basic mobile devices.
 The service must allow underserved people to access insurance services easily using a mobile device. Services which offer the mobile phone as just another channel for the clients of an insurance company to access a traditional insurance product are not included.
 The service must rely heavily on a network of transactional points outside bank branches which make the service accessible to unbanked and underbanked people. Customers must be able to use the service without having been previously banked. Mobile banking services which offer the mobile phone as just another channel to access a traditional banking product, and payment services linked to a current bank account or credit card such as Apple Pay and Google Wallet, are not included.
An e-money account which is primarily accessed using a mobile phone and which is held with the e-money issuer. In some jurisdictions, e-money accounts may resemble conventional bank accounts, but are treated differently under the regulatory framework because they are used for different purposes (for example, as a surrogate for cash or a stored value used to facilitate transactional services).
The mobile money ecosystem includes mobile money providers and all third-party organisations which can benefit from mobile money, either by using it as a payment mechanism or leveraging mobile money accounts. The mobile money ecosystem facilitates transactions from different sectors such as retail, utilities, healthcare, education, agriculture and transport, as well as insurance, savings, and credit.
Over-the-counter (OTC) services Some mobile money services are being offered primarily over-the-counter (OTC). In such cases, a mobile money agent performs the transactions on behalf of the customer, who does not need to have a mobile money account to use the service.
Regulator In the context of mobile money, this typically refers to the regulator who has supervisory authority over financial institutions within a particular country, usually the central bank or other financial authority.
Underbanked Customers who may have access to a basic transaction account offered by a formal financial institution, but still have financial needs that are unmet or not appropriately met.
Voucher Money sent as an off-net transfer from a mobile money account holder to an unregistered recipient, along with a code for the recipient to withdraw the funds at an agent outlet. Also known as a coupon or token.
agreement and technical integration between the bank and the mobile money provider to allow direct account-to-account (A2A) transfers.