Game networks have nationwide presence through kiosks and independent sellersvia Point of Sale (POS)terminals located in city streets and rural areas. Since 2007, these networks have increased the offer of services to the extent that nowadays people can do banking transactions, send remittances, buy insurance, pay utilities, and reload prepaid energy and phone services, all in one spot.
While in countries such as Kenya, India, and the Philippines, mobile money services (MMS) have become a tool for financial inclusion for the poor, in Colombia, cellular phones are mostly used for necessary calls, often through informal "minute-sellers" which offer lower-cost minutes than the prepaid plans. The contrast between the game network's popularity and the sluggish adoption of other digital networks presents an interesting opportunity for identifying key aspects of users' needs that mobile services have failed to address.
Our definition of "informal workers" refers to people whose primary economic objective is to provide basic sustenance to their families rather than capital accumulation per se. People in these conditions have minimal chances of complying with the requirements set by formal fi'nancial institutions.7 With low education levels and minimal employment opportunities, these workers survive by selling fruits, candy, newspapers, and small goods, or by providing services such as polishing shoes, washing cars, or selling cellphone minutes. To generate income, informal workers set up sal.e-pl.aces in busy streets, which means they constantly have to struggle for their right to work with official authorities and illegal groups that control the use of public space.
he business of informal sales relies on the small amounts of cash that people carry in their pockets and that are easily accessible for buying products and serv'ces on the go. Not only do street sellers need to have access to small amounts of cash, but also, the gains in cash at the end of the day are used to buy the next day's goods. This situation leaves very little room for using other payment and sav'ng options in the place of cash.
By contrast, game kiosks allow them to send money, buy reloads, and make payments from their workplace without the hidden costs and through a simpler process. Kiosks become a practical tool for setting aside or using available resources as these informal workers earn some income.
enabled them to stay within budget and save resources. This reload system also shows that it is important to offer services that adapt to income patterns of users and gives them control over usage. By adjusting payment cycles to usage patterns, users no longer fall behind payments or get cut from services.
through other familial arrangements: mothers, children, and older relatives all need to work and contribute to expenses. There are no quotas of fixed economic responsibilities, but each member is expected to help resolve the needs of the family.
The management and redistribution of that fund is often channeled through the person regarded as the most organized, responsible, and able of the group. Cohesion between family members remains in spite of physical distances, thus making remittances a crucial service for group survival.
transient groups. New members join the family while others leave. Domestic partners, single mothers, and relatives who can no longer survive on their own all affect family structures and the roles within the group. In this context, families prefer to use services and tools that allows them to contribute, share, exchange, and transfer value easily among members. While cash is the predominant means for contributing and sharing, service reloads, remittances and staples are also common ways in which members help each other. In the vast majority of cases, money and expense management is a group activity, not an individual action.
The Lack of meaningful benefits in formal savings institutions and the high penalties in formal credit institution drive the poor away from banks, and towards informal services.
costly. Almost all subjects interviewed noted that the amounts of money they handle are so small that a bank account is not worth their while: interest rates do not compensate charges, the security level is unnecessary, and access to a bank account does not guarantee access to credit.
20% daily interest rates and are repaid in a month or less. Many of the subjects interviewed use these loans since they have no access to formal credit. Far from feeling at great personal risk, subjects expressed appreciation for these lending services. Many mentioned that, unlike banks, payday loans offer quick credit evaluation, immediate cash availability, and on-site services. Some even noted that even if they had access to formal credit, they would still prefer payday loans because a bank would take days to process a request and can always reject it.
The Local government issues a Limited number of permits for street sellers to keep in balance the rights to work and to move freely. However, the number of street sellers is so high that authorities resort to police operations to confiscate the merchandise and clear streets. According to public space officials, there are 25,000 Public Space Permits but, during the Last ten years, the number of street sellers could have doubled.8 For this reason, a Public Space Permit has a value comparable to commercial real estate or exploitation rights that can be exchanged or traded in the informal market. For example, one street seller stated that he could sell "his place" for about US$ 2500, while another was offered US$ 7500 for his permit. None of the subjects with a Legal permit would consider selling it for fear of Losing their clients and sources of income. They are well aware of the value and protect those permits and places as a means to ensure their Livelihoods.
Regardless of the economic value in the informal market, a Public Space Permit says a Lot about its owner: work history, commitment to an activity, established commercial relationships, permanence in a community, and an estimated income. Paradoxically, the Lack of documentation to prove those facts prevents informal workers from gaining access to formal services.
The growing complexity of urban practices and services can confuse and overwhelm informal workers who, lacking resources and education, give up on resources.
lawsuits. These subsidies do not come regularly or, often times, are suspended without notice. Besides the difficulties in completing the paperwork, users feel poorly treated by state offi'cials and find the state's inefficacy so overwhelming that they often prefer to go without services.
offer no protection to informal sellers. Thus not only do informal workers face difficulty negotiating with the formal sector, but also they lack protection, knowledge, or means to defend their rights.
their experience indicates that these entities are not reliable. Moreover, as soon as a banking and credit institutions ask them to bring forms and documents, informal workers lose hope and start looking for other options: namely, game operators for remittances and payday loans for financing.
Build a transaction history as an alternative to a credit history. Services should provide a summary report that groups and quantifies payments, purchases, and transfers without compromising the privacy of the user. Thus, people who lack a credit history could demonstrate economic or commercial relationships over time.
Nowadays, remittances are the most dynamic complementary service offered by game networks. Nonetheless, access to small loans is the most critical need of informal workers. In collaboration with micro-finance institutions, it would be possible to offer short-cycle credit serv'ces that would be very useful to informal workers.
Legitimateinformal workers' contribution to the community. Because cash transactions are not usually recorded or tracked, it is difficult to estimate and value the economic role of informal workers in a community. If street sellers' associations had more precise information, they could better visualize the guild's contribution, the number of families that depend on their activity, as well as the relationships with other industries that benefit from informal workers. A digital transactions' network could provide information tools to guilds or associations that would help them gain recognition before the state and the private sector. In addition, these tools could help to develop more targeted programs and measure the success of those initiatives overtime.
and provide better work opportunities for the poor. As an example, hot-dog sellers could buy bread and ingredients from small suppliers owned or operated by street seller's families. At the same time, private companies could help structure those supplier's businesses as part of the social responsibility programs. In collaboration with micro-finance institutions, a transaction network could offer specifi'c tools to manage and track transactions among members or affiliated suppliers and sellers. The advantage of these services is that they coordinate and facilitate transactions outside the formal banking system.
ame networks have challenged the traditional banking system in Colombia by offering financial transactions to the poor through alternate channels. Despite the fact that remittances and payments are their main services, game networks are better positioned than banks to develop saving and credit services that fit the needs of informal workers. By developing alliances with micro-finance institutions, game networks could create a complete range of financial and transaction services accessible via kiosks, POS terminals, and mobile phones.
Without a consistent follow-up from the State and appropriate regulations that foster fi'nancial inclusion, mobile money services cannot be more nor less inclusive than ATM machines. The dominant position that banks and telecommunication companies can reach in the domestic market can negatively affect the development and availability of financial services to the poor. It is necessary to ensure that regulations allow multiple operators and service providers can compete and offer targeted services to specific groups, especially the poor because they have a limited access to traditional banking and credit resources.
Noviembre 11,2011. http://www.dinero.com/negodos/articulo/ en-colombia-478-miLU>nes-lineas-ceLular/140143   "De la Banca a la Titular." Portafitlio. Secddn: Bancarizaddn. Colombia. Septiembre 16, 2011.