This brief describes findings from the PharmAccess Mobile Health Research Lab in Lagos, Nigeria, where tests are ongoing to see how mobile money can be used to incentivize households in low-income communities to save and pay for healthcare.
 To observe any changes in healthcare utilization in participating health facilities and in the target participants' health-seeking behavior.
and fifty low-income households in Makoko, a peri-urban community in Lagos. The test targeted primarily women with children under the age of 5 who already had a mobile phone. 75% of the women recruited had completed secondary school education. Only a few households had heard of mobile money, so field agents were recruited from the target community to help with promoting the wallet and aiding with reporting and resolving issues that arose during the test period.
5. Over half of the money spent by the participating households (55%) went to over-the-counter drugs. Specific disease consultations and treatments at the clinics took up 27% of the funds, while 10% was spent on non-health purchases such as call credit and non-health consumables.
 The test demonstrated that the use of the USSD mobile-money platform is fairly easy to learn and generally acceptable if the payment instruction is simplified.
 Households preferred to purchase medicine from patent medicine vendors as they are cheaper than health facilities.
The next phase of the test would include a savings component; specifically to test the sustainability of dedicated mobile health wallets for saving.
Blessing is a mother of five children who sells food commercially in the slums of Makoko. She admits that even though she previously had no idea she could use her phone as a mobile wallet; it did not take her long to learn and understand how to use the new system.
PharmAccess mobilizes public and private resources for the benefits of patients and doctors through quality improvements and clinical standards, loans for healthcare providers, health insurance, health infrastructure consultancy, HIV/AIDS corporate programs, mHealth and impact research.