Reality television programs and social media now offer a world stage for anyone who aspires to become a star. The window these platforms provide into the lives of others is inspiring people to pursue their dreams as they see peers dance, sing, invent, and cook their way to fame. People living in rural communities in emerging parts of South Asia and sub-Saharan Africa learn and are motivated by their peers in similar ways. Although they may not have access to the Internet or bandwidth or even electricity, these individuals learn by observing their neighbors' fields, by asking others about the crops they grow and how they grow them, or inquiring about neighbors' health issues and how they treat them. Development agencies, from government departments to the NGOs that work with these rural communities, are critical catalysts in this learning process.
Kerry Harwin is a New Delhi-based development consultant and journalist. His professional background includes agricultural, energy, environmental policymaking in the U.S. Senate, energy and climate policy advocacy with the Shakti Sustainable Energy Foundation, and monitoring and evaluating with Digital Green. His articles have appeared in publications including Foreign Policy, GQ, Times of India, The Hindu, and several Indian periodicals.
At Digital Green, we train development agency employees and people in the communities where they work how to produce and distribute content, mainly in the form of videos. These videos, which primarily feature information about better farming techniques and nutrition practices, are shared in groups formed by motivated and talented community members. Produced by and for the community, the videos spur an ecosystem of educational, entrepreneurial, and entertaining content, acting as a kind of village social networking platform.
We use a hub-and-spoke approach in the production and distribution of content to mitigate the need to produce a video in every village while still ensuring a high degree of localization. Roughly 80 percent of the videos an individual views in her village are produced in the district where she resides; the other 20 percent might be from an adjacent district with a comparable linguistic, sociocultural, and agro-ecological context. Localization also means ensuring that farmers have access to all products or services (inputs) needed to convert the practices learned on the Digital Green videos into concrete action on their farms.
Traditional agricultural extension methods rely on highly trained experts who go out into the field to interact directly with farmers. Given the nearly 700 million Indians who live in rural areas, most of whom rely on agriculture as their primary source of income, the barriers to extension on a large scale are huge: there is not sufficient human capital available, farmers grow a variety of crops, they may not speak the same language as the mediator, and an inadequate transportation infrastructure can make it difficult for extension agents to reach the rural communities. Digital Green was conceived as a way to extend the reach of extension systems. We identified video as a primary tool for communicating with farmers, based on a rigorous testing process that compared cost and adoption rates when farmers were trained by experienced extension agents, viewed informational posters, listened to radio programs, watched training videos with a facilitator to mediate the experience, and watched videos without a facilitator.
We found that facilitated video viewing can spur farmers to adopt new agricultural practices for about one-tenth of the cost of traditional extension systems.3 We believe that much of the success of facilitated video stems from its ability to demonstrate localization. Farmers featured in the videos are usually from the same district as the viewers, and because the videos are shot in the farmers' own fields, the viewers can compare the conditions in the videos to those in their own fields. This builds trust in the information shared.
To build even deeper confidence, the facilitators, who typically live in the same village as the farmers viewing the video, are on hand to ensure that viewers understand the processes being demonstrated. These facilitators are a key element of the Digital Green approach, and they often vouch for the local applicability of the practices taught in the videos. Their similarity to the people viewing the videos also means that they are considered trustworthy. Equally importantly, they provide structure to the video screening process, which promotes engagement and learning. They ensure that all participants are present and engaged, and before starting a video, they pause throughout the screening process to ask questions, which helps to ensure that the participating farmers are grasping the information. Facilitators also help link farmers with necessary inputs (such as seeds and fertilizers) or provide information about markets.
may know she needs a low-cost solution to a pest problem, and her questions about that topic could guide our partners in creating new content. Or, farmers may not be aware of an improved seed variety, such as drought-resistant rice, and our agricultural experts can introduce them to it through a Digital Green video.
When a team gets ready to produce a video, they work with our subject-matter specialists to create storyboards, which are then vetted by scientists working with our partners. After the videos are shot and edited by the production team, they are again vetted by subject matter specialists and cross-checked by Digital Green staff to ensure their technical clarity and soundness before being disseminated in the community.
When paired with human facilitators, people in rural communities readily recognize the value of the video content, as the facilitators put the practices demonstrated in the videos into the context of the farmers' daily lives, provide follow-up support, and connect information with the inputs needed to take action. Even sophisticated Internet users with broadband connections and access to abundant information look to informed peers to help process their experiences. This kind of guidance is especially crucial in rural communities where people have a low level of self-efficacy and education.
This approach helped us appreciate the local context, but our ability to scale was limited until we made our partners responsible for driving the Digital Green activities themselves. We established regional offices to provide training and support to our partners and saw the rollout of our approach accelerate. Within the next two years, we expect to increase the number of facilitators we work with from 5,000 to 10,000.
Facilitators select videos from a library of seasonally appropriate content, and they also rescreen videos at the request of the farmers. It isn't uncommon for groups to view the same video multiple times, which helps them gain confidence in their ability to implement the practices seen successfully.
We're unable to quantify this particular effect of our efforts, but Digital Green program participants say that the knowledge they gain through our facilitated screenings has bolstered their decisionmaking power within their households. Although our workshops are largely focused on farming decisions, we believe that women who are better informed will have more productive farms. We also hope that our efforts will also help to promote gender equality in rural India.
Working in areas with limited electricity and telecommunications infrastructure can complicate technology-based solutions, and relying on paper-based forms that are entered into COCO at a central hub can slow our access to timely data. To improve the timing and accuracy of our data reporting, we have worked to make COCO simple to use, even by those with limited computer literacy, and have developed a mobile version. To enable uninterrupted data collection in areas with intermittent Internet connectivity, COCO has been built using technologies enabled through the HTML5 standard. The capabilities of this architecture make COCO accessible across browsers, whether a tablet, laptop, or smartphone. The tool also serves as a generic library, which enables the open-source community to use other programs and organizations to collect data, both online and offline. We are currently deploying COCO on the mobile phones of facilitators across our project sites, and we have seen a fall in reporting time where it has been implemented.
conducting a large-scale randomized control trial to evaluate well-being, income, and productivity measures among our participating farmers.
interests of individuals in a community more efficiently. The Digital Green video screenings also introduce a dimension of knowledge-sharing to self-help groups that are involved in other activities, such as microcredit and savings. Moreover, the content, data, and feedback hosted on Digital Green's website foster sharing and collective learning among our partners. With nearly one million views of the videos posted online in the last year, our open-access platform stimulates accountability and transparency between partners and external audiences, like researchers and the general public, who in turn can contribute knowledge and leverage the data shared by our growing grassroots network of communities to support their own work.
Over the last five years, Digital Green has engaged more than 380,000 farmers in 5,000 villages across India, Ethiopia, and Ghana. At the same time, technology and content are only good at magnifying human intent and capability. Digital Green has been successful because it has developed its videos using local content attained through a bottom-up selection, which ensures that the messages in our videos are accessible to all farmers, and we have been institutionalizing our approach within established extension systems. When a video sparks the curiosity of people in rural communities, it can help them take small steps toward improving their lives and of those around them.
3 R. Gandhi et al., "Digital Green: Participatory Video and Mediated Instruction for Agricultural Extension." Information Technologies & International Development, 2009.