The study explores arguments concerning the concept of the informal economy and makes the case that new media technologies, or more broadly, information and communication technologies (ICTs), as a socio-economic phenomenon, tend to be exploited in the same way as other economic activities by those actors that operate in the informal economy. Moreover, this exploitation tends to show similar patterns in terms of growth and ownership concentration. In this context, the study ailaiyses lIil* paUeiTiS aild ICTidcTiCiCS ihaL iiailSpiie wliCTi iTiiOiTiiai aClOiS exploit ICTs. It aims to question the validity of the neolibcral paradigm that portrays informality and new media technology as a creative process that requires deregulation. The article is based on a field study carried out in Venezuela between 2003 and 2004.
People are locked out of the formal-legal economy because of heavy bureaucracy, corruption and mainly high cost of operating legally; they have houses but not titles; crops but not deeds; businesses but not statutes of incorporation. (De Soto, Ghersi and Ghibellini, 1986: 31).
In the case of Venezuela, informal activities not only represent an important proportion of the labour market, but also of the economy as a whole. According to public and private estimates, 15 per cent of GDP produced in 2000 was by the informal sector, which in itself is a significant number because oil, the main export in this country.
ployed in the informal sector (INE, 2007). This largely urban phenomenon grew exponentially as a result of the economic downturn in the 1980s. During this decade, a sharp decrease in the price of oil and other raw materials that represent the majority of Venezuela's export income led to the country falling behind in payments to international debtors and a dramatic fall in public spending and private investment. The worsening situation lead to the implementation of the IME-World Bank-designed austerity programmes, which had a notable impact on employment. These programmes, shaped by what has been termed the Washington Consensus, opened up the already fragile sectors of the Venezuelan economy to international competition, ensuring that many of those previously employed in rural areas had to move to the cities in search of work in the informal sector. Therefore, it is not necessarily the cost of legality that pushes people into informality, as De Soto and others have argued, but other factors, such as an economic crisis and the negative impact of international commerce, which can profoundly expand the informal sector.
workers (Drucker, 1993). In this way, new media technology supports the neoliberal drive to free the forces of economic creativity and growth by means of deregulation.
In addition, the liberalisation of dead capital can lead to even more informality (Itzigsohn, 2000). Such studies suggest a need to make a more critical analysis of the role of new media technology in the informal sector: a research strategy that sidesteps the assumptions of the neoliberal discourse.
Using examples from Venezuela, we aim to explore the use of new media technologies, or more precisely, information and communication technologies (ICTs) in the informal sector. The use of ethnography as a method to analyse informality in relation to the economic functioning of formal institutions is derived from a form of economic anthropology originating with Folanyi's significant distinction between substantive economic activity  making a living - and the formal economy - the logic of the market itself (Polanyi et al., 1957). Ethnographic study highlights the cultural narratives that emerge from the process of digital diffusion in the developing world by illustrating how individuals and communities promote self-organised economic and technological activity. Such responses are often tied to the way in which the formal economy retains entry barriers for informal actors. De Soto's concept of the informal economy is thus assessed as a resourceful response to the state's inability to satisfy the basic needs of a society, as well as the supposed egalitarian nature of the ICT market in this informal environment.
The self-proclaimed socialist president of Venezuela, Hugo Chavez, has become a focus of attention for international media following a series of institutional changes and economic reforms designed to tackle poverty using national oil reserves. The decline of traditional manufacturing and the agricultural sector, combined with the structural limitations of the country's service sector, has resulted in 50 per cent of the population being paid less than US$5 per day, and the country has an official unemployment rate of 11.4 per cent (INE, 2005). However, the recent expansion of the public sector and the increase in international oil prices has allowed a significant fall in unemployment. We should also add that GDP has grown at a rate of 5 per cent on average in the past three years.
Between December 2003 and January 2004, 100 cyber-informal centres were surveyed in the cities of Maracaibo and Caracas. Ten of them became the focus of participatory observations and the central theme of semi-structured interviews. None of these cyber-informal centres fulfilled the legal requirement to notify. The National Telecommunication Council CONATEL about their operations. This was avoided in order to bypass registration fees and taxation. Therefore, there are no reliable statistics regarding the number of informal actors exploiting ICTs as their primary source of income.
Two main conclusions can be drawn from our findings. First, in the context of the informal economy, ICTs are exploited in much the same way as other products and services. Second, and more significantly, the initial demand for intensive capital investment required for an ICT business start-up is higher than in other sectors. 'Intensive capital investment' refers to a situation wherein a business requires the reinvestment of capital (sometimes in excess of the profit made from sales) at a faster rate than inflation in order to restock itself. In these situations, small actors are often unable to keep pace with the needs of reinvestment and have to sell out to larger actors who can afford intensive capital investment. These additional requisites and resources thus may exclude individual actors almost from the very start. For example, while a huhonero [street vendor! iR Venezuela may work for commission on merchandise sold on the streets, the ability to rent a mobile telephone as a basis for setting up a calling service requires access to a credit card. Thus, the informal exploitation of ICTs produces higher entry barriers than other informal activities, such as food or clothing retail.
Software and entertainment piracy arguably impact negatively on the formal music and software industries in Venezuela. The Sociedad de Autores y Composi-tores de Venezuela (SACVEN), the main union of musicians and composers engaged in protecting copyright in Venezuela, proposed that 85 per cent of the videos and music CDs in Venezuela are illegal copies, while 72 per cent of the software installed on computers is done so illegally. The telecommunications industry, however, has increased income considerably over the past few years. CONATEL, the main private telecommunications corporation operating in Venezuela, reported a sustained income growth between 1997 and 2003, rising from US$2.5 million in 1997 to US$4.7 million in 2001, and maintaining a figure over US$3.2 million since then. The main actor, the formerly state owned monopoly CANTV, with 10,000 employees, announced a net income for 2003 of almost US$12 million, which represented a net growth of 60.4 per cent for that year. Mobile subscriptions have grown exponentially  increasing from 1.1 million in 1997 to over 20 million by 2006 (CONATEL, 2007).
These centres include the Infocentros, Centres de Comunicaciones (CANTV) and Centres de Conexiones (Telcel). Source: CONATEL (2004).
Despite a growing market for the Internet, with an extra 1.2 million additional people using it on a regular basis, the telecommunications corporations admit that it is difficult to sustain their public information centres. It seems that this is not a problem of price competition, since in most cases prices are fixed in both the formal and informal sectors, but instead one of operating costs. Informal actors can also offer sales mobility and additional services that would infringe copyright. Cyber-informal centres do not offer iiidepeiiucni Lclccoiiiiiiuiiicalioiis services, hut insicau rely on the three main corporations. Therefore, they do not compete in terms of price. Nevertheless, they are more sustainable over time because profit margins can keep pace with increasing operational costs. In addition to this, the centres provide a degree of flexibility with regard to pedestrian traffic and market potential. Unlike their formal counterparts, the centres can be easily dismantled and relocated. Moreover, one of the most important advantages is their ability to offer additional formal and informal products and services. This challenges the viewpoint that informal activities merely provide an illicit means to a legal end (De Soto, Ghersi and Ghibellini, 1986). Piracy plays an important role in making cyber-informal centres sustainable. Cyber-informal centres overlap in terms of operation, not only offering access to mobile telephones and Internet navigation, but also providing other services such as illegal copies of music CDs and software CD-ROMs, a key aspect of the market according to 61 of the 100 interviewees.
Sometimes the police come and look around asking for my permit. But I know that what they are really after is a free call. I give it to them and they stop bothering me.
Significantly, in our field study, informal actors have demonstrated an ability not only to adapt to technological changes and challenges, such as the trend towards on-demand media services, but also to create novel service infrastructures that their counterparts are legally unable to offer. There are three main observations to be made with regards to this. First, these infrastructures are not only flexible, but also technologically convergent. For example, by appropriating digital content (the code), informal actors are able to offer multi-platform services. Second, these infrastructures are widely networked across the urban spaces in which they operate. When asked about services that were not in stock, many of the attendants would make a telephone call, not necessarily to wholesale distributors, but to other informal retailers in the area. One fourteen-year-old client who wanted to buy a popular ring tone (known as the 'Grazy Frog') for her mobile telephone exemplified this point. Despite the fact that the popular ring tone had been licensed in mid-2004 by the German-based Jamba! Group, by early 2004 it was already widely available in Venezuela throughout these informal networks of retailers. In this particular case, the retailer, located in the Playitas Market in Maracaibo, did not have the ring tone, but after making a call it was emailed to him in a matter of minutes. When we asked where the ring tone came from, he said it was sent by another retailer in the same market. Third, it is important to point out that informal networks have access to most products and services available in the formal ICT market. These are often illegally downloaded from the Internet in specific centres or purchased abroad by those with links to international networks of software piracy. Therefore it is not uncommon to find that many of the cyber-informal centres are able to obtain rapidly the most recent digital products on the market.
validity of certain assumptions concerning market rules and categories when it comes to the piracy of ICTs within informal sectors. Indeed, there is a complex system of business models chat co-exist in these informal networks. In some cases, operators require traditional distributors. In others, new media services and products do not require wholesale distribution beyond that provided directly by the telecommunications companies, and in some cases no distribution is required at all.
centres in Caracas and Maracaibo (54 female workers and 46 male workers were interviewed). However, further research into the role of attendants, including the role of females, would be needed, as there is not sufficient evidence in our field study to support a detailed analysis of gender roles in these types of knowledge-based activities. The age ratio is variable, but it is clear that people under 30 and over 50 years tended to be informal workers, while those in the years between tended to be owners. In other words, the first group (-30 and +50 years) were concentrated in the 73 centres owned by a third party, while the rest (ages 31-49 years) were mainly proprietors or partners running their own business. Most of this latter group were former traders or professional workers who had become unemployed during the past 48 months. There is further supporting data to suggest that the pauperisation of Venezuela's middle class has played a significant role in social mobility in the informal sector (Barreiro, 2005). The increasing presence of former traders or professional workers might therefore be regarded as a result of ongoing economic crisis (Barrios, 2004: 158). Others have argued that their appearance in the informal sector marks a decreasing sphere of career options in the formal sector, and further embodies the decline of working conditions in Venezuela (Saade, 2005). None of the informal workers interviewed had any type of incentive or benefit beyond their weekly wage. Moreover, almost all of those interviewed said that they are unable to find another job.
be considered as mere attendants. This also limits the flexibility with which the cyber-informal workers operate in terms of negotiating prices and services.
Consequently, if the exploitation of ICTs by informal actors seems to exhibit similar patterns, in terms of growth and ownership concentration, to other more traditional sectors, there are an important number of other factors that are very different. This analysis of digital diffusion should not be regarded as an exact mirror of the exploitation of products, services and labour in the analogue world, but it is equally important to point to the continuities between analogue and digital exploitation beyond the hyperbole of the information revolution. This suggests that such specificities are not the result of technological determinism, but emerge from the interaction between human articulation and technological innovation.
paradigm of development through creativity, actually perpetuates and aggravates exclusion, while inhibiting the redistribution of wealth. This now seems equally problematic. This is not because it is negated by the findings of our research, but because these observations also suggest a more complex paradigm in terms of the wholesale/ retail relationship between ownership, participation and know-how. If the findings indicate an exploitation model of ICTs that tends towards ownership consolidation and subsequent concentration, and follows the same paradigm of other informal sectors, we argue that this cannot be seen to be the overriding factor. As in other sectors, stock reposition within economies, characterised by chronic inflation, is key to explaining the need for intensive capital investment and the subsequent tendency to concentrate ownership in the medium and long term (Rincon and Portillo, 1992). However, this is by no means the only determinant. Indeed, the exploitation of ICTs in the informal sector seems to follow a series of characteristics and defining features that are clearly not present in the exploitation of other products and services.
informal actors reproduces existing practices by shortening the periods of ownership consolidation, limiting the flexibility of negotiation and restricting the role of independent actors, it is also the case that these practises present different options in terms of wholesale/retail relation, participation and the spatial reconfiguration of networks of informal actors. Furthermore, these actors emerge not as a result of the excessive value/ cost of legality determined by bureaucratic regulation (company registration, legal requirements, etc.), but by the opportunities, and the risk or cost, associated with operating in the grey market, (salary, piracy, sales-point mobility, customer traffic, etc.)  and the ability to operate services across different geographic areas.
tion of policies in Latin America, since multilateral institutions, such as UNESCO, have been assessing the diffusion of ICTs as a way of supporting micro-enterprises and economic development (Binde, 2005). However, this perspective is more often chan not determined by the assumption chat both technology and deregulation can act as transformational agents across the region. Arguably, most of these institutions base their policies on a logic framed by the postulates and assumptions that we have endeavoured CO assess critically in this article. Organisations such as the Incer-American Development Bank place great emphasis on both technological innovation and deregulation when dealing with the informal sector (Freije, 2005). Nevertheless, several authors have begun to question the validity of this paradigm (Mochache, 1997; Quijano, 1998; Maloney, 2004) and some have even demanded a reassessment of concepts such as dead capital, creativity and social capital (Fine, 1999).
Barrios, L. (2004) 'La clase media sale del paraiso'. Revista venezolana de economia y ciencias sociales 2(10): 155-161.
De Soto, H. (2001) 'Citadels of Dead Capital: What the Third World Must Learn from U.S. History'. Reasononline [WWW document]. URL http://reason.eom/0105/may.shtml [accessed 5 March 2005].
Donner, J. (2004) *Microcntreprcneurs and Mobiles: An Exploration of the Uses of Mobile Phones by Small Business Owners in Rwanda'. Information Technologies and International Dex'elopment 1{\): 1-21.
Fine, B. (1999) The Development State Is - Dead Long Live Social Capital'. Development and Change 1(30): 1-19.
Freije, S. (2005) Informal Employment in Latin America and the Caribbean: Causes, Consequences and Policy Recommendations. Inter-American Development Bank: Washington, DC.
Gunaratnc, S. (1994) 'U.S. and U.K. Re-entry into UNESCO: A Reportorial Description and a Theoretical Analysis', jurnal Komunikasi 10(2): 99-122.
Itzigsohn, J. (2000) Developing Poverty: The State, Labor Market Deregulation, and the Informal Economy in Costa Rica and the Dominican Republic. Pennsylvania State University Press: Pennsylvania.
Mariussen, A., Wheelock, J. and Bains, S. (1997) 'The Family Business Tradition in Britain and Norway: Modernisation or Reinvention?'. International Studies of management and Organisation 27(3): 64-86.
Portes, A., Castclls, M. and Benton, L. A. (1998) The Informal Economy: Studies in Advanced and Less Developed Countries. The Johns Hopkins University Press: Baltimore.
Sardo, L. (1987) 'Customs Service Regulations Permitting the Entry of Grey-Market Goods -Arc they Valid'. George Washington Review 55(4): 1115-1124.
Tokman, V. (1996) Regulation and the Informal Economy: Microenterprises in Chile, Ecuador, and Jamaica. Lynne Ricnner: London.