NextBillion.net is a community of business leaders, social entrepreneurs, NGO managers, policy makers, academics and others exploring the connection between development and enterprise. It chronicles new trends in market solutions to poverty that benefit the world's 4 billion low-income producers and consumers - often known as the base of the pyramid.
But though mobile money access has grown, product usage is still narrow - in most cases (87 percent of global transactions), customers use digital finance to send money or buy airtime exclusively.
There is no question that these innovations are exciting and are pushing mobile financial inclusion forward. But in many cases, these innovations address niche segments (e.g., energy payments, merchant cash advances), are led by larger bank-MNO partnerships and address short-term working capital (e.g., CBA and Safaricom and Vodacom). In contrast, poor customers need access to a variety of financial tools - not just a stand-alone savings account or a niche credit product. They also need access to more capital than a short-term low-value loan provides.
Using mobile money as a channel for financial institutions provides clear benefits to each party. Operators see increased transaction revenue due to greater activity rates from current customers or engagement with new customer segments, and financial institutions are able to reach customers more efficiently and conveniently at a lower cost.
Working to address both of these issues, three years ago Grameen Foundation (a NextBillion content partner) launched the Mobile Financial Services Accelerator program, with funding help from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. This project focused on helping financial institutions with an emphasis on services for the poor to offer current and new products via mobile money agency networks. As part of this program, Grameen Foundation partnered with Centenary Bank and Pride MDI, two financial institutions in Uganda. Both institutions are focused on reaching the rural poor, and they were committed to doing so using technology.
Editor's note: This is the second in a series by Grameen Foundation on what it takes for institutions that provide microfinance services to go digital. You can read the first post here.
MDI to create a clear set of procedures, owners and decision makers to address problems as they arise. In the new model, the escalation matrix delegates authority to lower level managers who can take immediate action for certain events, and with authority appropriate for their position. These managers then report to the head office after they have taken corrective measures instead of reporting an issue and awaiting guidance.
These managers then report to the head office after they have taken corrective measures instead of reporting an issue and awaiting guidance Too often, organizations manage risk retroactively. When transactions happen via a mobile phone versus at the branch, multiple issues can arise before they can be raised at a formal credit committee or risk management committee meeting. This includes an unplanned system outage, challenges reconciling between the mobile network operator's platform and the institution's core banking system, or agents lacking cash or e-value to service customers.
Figure 1 (left) shows how an organization could shift the way it monitors customer service, narrowing from five KPIs to two KRIs. Focusing on fewer metrics in real time that can be predictive of a legitimate risk to the business - or at least a changing trend - is much more effective than monitoring several metrics that merely count historical performance issues.
Digital services require new technical vendors to work within existing systems, such as core banking systems, and those of mobile banking providers and other technical vendors. Having this many inflection points creates multiple opportunities for risk. Developing detailed process flows for each process, interaction, decision and consequence can help a microfinance institution avert a crisis resulting from integration challenges.
Although many of the risks in building a new distribution channel are operational, risk management for digital services requires a holistic approach involving every division. It is, therefore, critical to have integrated teams, including staff experienced in credit, operations, HR, treasury, marketing and IT. For example, in our Accelerator program, we trained a partner task force within Pride MDI that jointly conducted a baseline assessment to help identify the current risk approach and identify areas in which risk management needed to be strengthened. Now, managers across the organization in this engagement take part in proactively identifying and managing risk.
Editor's note: This is the third post in a series by Grameen Foundation on what it takes for institutions that provide microfinance services to go digital. You can read the first post here, and the second one here.
But for financial institutions, forging these connections is more complex. Connecting financial institutions and operators requires merging technical systems that are not always easily compatible. And though some larger institutions have made the investment, many pro-poor institutions have lacked the resources and capabilities to do so.
The DFS platform ia a solution that allows customers to transfer value between mobile money wallets and bank accounts using a mobile phone. The shared infrastructure makes it cheaper & taster (or new financial institutions to connect.
 Isolating the Technology: The technology work involved in opening digital channels should be separated, and its success can't be assumed. The best technology applications are developed through specific use cases and strong support for developing requirements and testing solutions. Create a separate work stream for the technology integration that provides connectivity before fully engaging the other business functions within the organization, such as human resources and marketing. Also, invest in integrating the technology infrastructure, both the physical connections (such as required virtual private networks [VPNs] or leased lines) as well as a sufficient level of application-level integration (such as confirming the availability of required data parameters), to prove feasibility and provide demonstration and test platforms.
The development of the DFS platform in Uganda aims to address these internal challenges by creating a simplified process and guides that make it easier for financial organizations to join. Additionally, to ensure that pro-poor institutions of all sizes are able to afford to access the system, Cellulant offers a basic package of services (simple deposits from mobile wallet to bank accounts, and withdrawals from bank accounts to mobile wallet functionality) at a significant reduction in joining costs.
Lisa Kienzie manages global operations and strategy for Grameen Foundation's financial services initiatives. Leo Tobias is the Technical Program Manager for the Grameen Foundation Microsavings project.
Editor's note: This is the fourth post in a series by Grameen Foundation on what it takes for institutions that provide microfinance services to go digital. You can read the first post here, the second one here, and the third one here.
Generic concepts such as "take your bank everywhere" do little to explain mobile services. (Note: This ad concept was never used publicly).
Melinda Gates Foundation, partnered with two institutions offerin g microfinance services in Uganda to connect bank accounts to mobile money, we were keenly aware of this challenge.
In the process, one thing became clear: Increasing the adoption of digital financial services requires a lot more than just good advertising. We've compiled in this post a few of the challenges and best practices we identified.
While traditional above-the-line marketing approaches (usually mass media promotions) build awareness, they often have limited ability to influence usage. This is especially true in areas where the benefits of digital financial services are the strongest - rural communities, where branches are far away and transportation is costly. Limited resources, low education and inexperience with technology, however, make many of the rural poor risk averse. Consequently, they are often the last to adopt new technology. To reach the poor, financial institutions must engage in below-the-line, experiential techniques (direct-to-consumer marketing) through personal interactions, and by gaining early support from community influencers.
To address these challenges we focused on streamlining each institution's operations to improve service delivery and enhance the customer experience at the branch. We also refocused their marketing efforts to communicate with the target customers more directly. We've included a few examples below.
For example, at Pride MDI, constraints in time and resources made it difficult to train all the staff on the new service. As a result, many knew about Pride Mobile, but didn't know how to use it and could not actually explain it fully. Instead of trying to train everyone, we asked each branch manager to select an especially motivated staff member at the branch who could serve as a champion for Pride Mobile. We trained those individuals and relied on them to train others at their branch. With only 31 champions, we were able to conduct a highly immersive, motivational, two-day training that covered details about the product as well as tips for training co-workers.
Communicate with customers more directly: Below-the-line and in-person touch points are hugely important in helping a customer use digital financial services for what might be the first time. Whenever possible, find ways to have branch staff explain the product directly. Take advantage of long lines in queues to show customers product demos. When considering messaging, generic concepts such as "take your bank everywhere" (see the photo from an unpublished ad concept at the top of the page) do little to explain the service. Use real-life examples (like those from Centenary's actual campaign, shown in the images below) to make the product resonate for different customer segments.
A full review of the lessons learned on go-to-market strategies for digital financial services can be found here.
Editor's note: This is the fifth post in a series by Grameen Foundation on what it takes for institutions that provide microfinance services to go digital. You can read the first post hem, the second one here, the third one here, and the fourth one here.
As such, it is vital to have a clear understanding of the impact of connecting to a digital system. Grameen Foundation worked with internal stakeholders from different business units at Centenary and Pride to estimate the benefits and costs of the digital system provided by Cellulant, the DFS platform provider in our project. Marketing and Human Resources gauged the cost of training staff and internal change management, and Operations helped identify the ongoing processes needed for digital financial services. Information Technology assessed the cost of integration with the core banking system, and Finance guided approaches for reconciliation and monitoring. The result was a view of the whole cost structure of this new service in relation to the financial institution's internal operations. Organizations considering a move into digital services should perform a similarly detailed assessment.
Many financial institutions already have mobile banking products that enable customers to conduct basic transactions (balance inquiry, account to account transfers, etc.), and these relationships include pre-existing revenue share agreements. For example, Centenary and Pride both had pre-existing relationships with other providers for basic mobile banking services. As such, those providers receive a fee for each charge levied on transactions through CenteMobile and/or Pride Mobile (our partners' mobile banking products). This adds cost to the system.
When money is pushed (deposited) from the wallet to the bank account: MNOs control fees to push money into the system. In Uganda, it is free to deposit cash into the wallet provided by MNOs, but there is a transaction fee to push money from the wallet to the bank. Some operators also apply a USSD session fee. An institution will need to take this into account to know the full price incurred by the customer.
When money is pulled (withdrawn) from the bank account to the wallet: Financial institutions will levy account withdrawal fees. The MNO will not charge for this transaction but does charge standard withdrawal fees to access cash at the agent.
A USSD session fee is also applied by the MNO because pull transactions are handled by USSD menu sessions that connect the customer to the bank's menu.
Setting a suitable price for the customer is critical to sustainability. The fee levied by the MNO to bring money in - the first important step - impacts whether and how often clients will deposit funds. Financial institutions must work with MNOs to ensure that they maintain reasonable prices, so as not to deter customers from depositing money. The USSD is an additional cost that is negotiated between the institution and the MNO; the institution can choose to absorb the fee (which Centenary did, for example) or pass it on through increased prices to customers.
The resulting customer pricing must a) be affordable for the poor to encourage usage while balancing the various costs across the ecosystem, and b) drive high-volume behaviors to realize desired benefits.
Ultimately, it is important to remember that going digital is the addition of a new channel to existing products, not a product itself. While customer fees may cover costs, this service will not be a stand-alone profit center. A strong DFS commercial model will reduce distribution costs and increase revenue, but it requires an understanding of the full implications of the new service as well as a strategy to encourage behaviors by customers that will yield a successful investment.
[2] This cost impact varies with the type of agent management model the institution (and the legislation in the country) favors and/or enables. Legislation on agent banking in Uganda is such that banks cannot use non-bank staff to sell bank services. They instead rely on MNO agents. If agency banking were an option, the bank may decide to invest in bank agents directly.
Editor's note: This is the sixth post in a series by Grameen Foundation on what it takes for institutions that provide microfinance services to go digital. You can read the first post here, the second one here, the third one here, the fourth one here, and the fifth one here.
Strong human capital systems can help financial institutions manage this change. When Grameen Foundation began working with Pride MDI and Centenary Bank, we first conducted a human capital management assessment, spanning several areas, to understand existing practices (see chart below). Those findings helped identify areas of strength and weakness before launching the digital offer.
Engaging with sUitf in the field lu understand factors that would help a product reach its goals or hinder success. Assessing organizational strategy, dynamics and DNA to understand the structure, as well as the business objectives. Understanding leadership practices and current capabilities of leadership to foster a shared vision.
Understanding the culture - the assumptions, beliefs, values, expectations and rules that members share. Understanding the organization's performance planning and management strategy and training and development philosophy. Reviewing monetary and nonmonetary rewards to understand how employees arc engaged and motivated to achieve goals.
In our engagements, senior management led the process. The managing director of Centenary Bank sent a bank-wide communication introducing the new channel and kicking off the staff promotion. To encourage staff to familiarize themselves with the product, Centenary held contests during the pilot to identify the branch with the greatest number of average transactions and the individual staff who transacted the most. He also participated in the award ceremony for the winning branch and staff member. At Pride MDI, the head of corporate affairs issued this communication and also ran a campaign for staff usage to drive excitement across the organization.
Develop and train field managers: The strategy is driven from the top, but the day-to-day execution of the digital strategy is managed in the branches. Strong field managers, or strong approaches for providing training and support, are crucial to ensure that the field team is briefed, trained, and equipped to deliver. However, it cannot be assumed that there is strong management at all levels.
Engage field staff when developing the offer: The staff at an institution's branch offices have the most frequent contact with customers. Engaging them (and customers) early on regarding their expectations of a digital service can help a financial institution tailor the service, the marketing, and the internal training approach. With both partners, Grameen Foundation used the staff as part of our pilot of the service to obtain feedback on messaging or menu issues.
Editor's note: This is the seventh post in a series by Grameen Foundation on what it takes for institutions that provide microfinance services to go digital. You can read the first post here, the second one here, the third one here, the fourth one here, the fifth one here, and the sixth one here.
The PPI is a tool used by institutions to quantify poverty levels. It consists of a country-specific questionnaire and look-up table, and measures the probability that a given client falls above or below the national poverty line. As part of Grameen Foundation's Mobile Financial Services Accelerator project, the PPI was instrumental for Pride MDI to obtain evidence-based data on its poverty outreach.
Pride MDI initially piloted the PPI using the manual paper-based system. However, for the full PPI roll-out, it underwent a more significant integration by building a PPI-enabled management information system directly into its core banking system. Pride MDI came away with several learnings from both the paper-based pilot and the integration of a digital system for the full launch.
Train staff robustly: Although staff were trained on the PPI, some employees did not adhere to instructions. For example, enumerators/loan officers must read each PPI question and answer option in its entirety to clients. Instances of staff not adhering to these guidelines were noted (e.g., skipping PPI questions); other staff inaccurately entered and summed up poverty scores.
Pride MDI was also surprised by the gender data - poverty levels were expected to be much higher among women, but this was not always true. In the best-performing branches, such as City Center, Kawempe and Katwe, women featured lower poverty profiles.
Byoung-Hwa Hwang is a Marketing and Communications Feiiow at Grameen Foundation, and Francis Wasswa is Research and Product Deveiopment Manager at Pride Microfinance Ltd.
The service enables financial institutions to reach clients via the nearest mobile money agent. In Uganda, this represents a four-fold increase in reach. Research in 2013 showed that while only 8 percent of the rural population was within 5 kilometers of a bank branch, 33 percent of them were within 5 kilometers of a financial access point, such as mobile money agents. It's a major step forward for formal financial institutions and for the poor.
In response to these issues, progress will need to be made on several fronts to expand the global mobile money ecosystem: new modes of operating in rural communities; innovative partnerships and products; and enabling regulations.
 Leveraging existing, trusted infrastructures to reach the poor: Tapping into existing structures by partnering with organizations that already work with the poor (such as agro-processors or NGOs) or working through village-level groups (such as informal savings groups) can offer new ways of reaching the poor.
 Pushing interoperability: As we have seen in Tanzania, interoperability (the ability of systems to work across network providers) paves the way for business model efficiency, increased competition and greater customer reach, which can be passed on to rural customers through lower costs.
 Know Your Customer (KYC) initiatives: Most of the East African countries still need to solve customer identities; Kenya is the only country with a national ID issued to its citizens. It will be difficult to move beyond basic person-to-person transactions and offer more complex products without a national identity record. Governments and the donor community need to explore innovative ways of registering populations to enable this verification.
Henry Maloba is an independent mobiie financial services consuitant for Grameen Foundation, and Lisa Kienzie manages giobai operations and strategy for Grameen Foundation's financial services initiatives.