The GSMA's Mobile Money for the Unbanked (MMU) programme works to accelerate the growth of commercially viable mobile money services to achieve greater financial inclusion.
This report was written by Mireya Almazan and Jennifer Frydrych. The authors would like to recognise the many mobile operators and financial inclusion experts who contributed to this research. In particular, the authors would like to thank Xavier Faz, Ignacio Mas and Carolina Trivelli. In addition, the authors would like to thank GSMA colleagues, Sebastian Cabello, Simone di Castri, Tiago Novais, Jose Sanin and Janet Shulist for their valuable inputs. Finally, the authors would like to express their sincere appreciation to the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation and Omidyar Network for their generous support.
This report is based on a collection of data sources, some of which are confidential. For example, data collected through MMU's annual Global Adoption Survey of Mobile Financial Services was one input into this research. This report protects the confidentiality of each deployment. We only highlight individual services where the service provider has granted approval to disclose key performance information, or where the information is already publicly available.
In this context, and bolstered by the contributions of banks and non-banks in select markets, LAC has emerged as a strong mobile money newcomer. Last year the region had the fastest growth in new registered mobile money accounts in the world,8 and a greater number of deployments are showing signs of reaching scale: three mobile money services have crossed the 1 million active customer milestone in diverse LAC markets and through distinct commercial models.
5. Refer to glossary for more detailed definition of mobile money. Note that mobile banking services that offer the mobile phone as just another channel to access traditional banking products, and payment services linked to pre-existing bank account or credit cards, are not included.
7. Simone di Castri, 2013, "Mobile Money: Enabling regulatory solutions", GSMA Mobile Money for the Unbanked (MMU).
9. GSMA, April 2015, MMU Deployment Tracker. Available at: http://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/programmes/mobile-money-for-the-unbanked/insights/tracker. LAC deployments are listed in Appendix A.
10. TIM Multibank Caixa and Olha Conta in Brazil, PlataMovil in Colombia, Orange m-peso in the Dominican Republic, Banco Central de Ecuador's Mobile Money Platform in Ecuador, Movil Cash of Cable & Wireless Panama, and Movistar's Tu Dinero Movil in Peru.
Mobile money distribution has also expanded across LAC markets offering mobile money services. The number of registered agents more than doubled between December 2013 and December 2014, from 27,000 to 63,000 (130% increase). Over the same period the number of active agents (30-day) also grew, though at a lower rate, from 16,000 to 29,000 (81% increase). This unequal growth caused agent activity rates across LAC to drop by 13 percentage points in 2014. Thus, 46% of all registered agents in 2014 were active, as compared to 59% the year prior.12 This can be explained, in part, by large registration drives to enlist agents, which is common in nascent mobile money markets. A large retail chain13 partnership for mobile money distribution, for example, can also drive up agent registration rates significantly without a corresponding increase in activity rates.
Interestingly, as of December 2014, over a quarter of all transaction volumes in LAC were from ecosystem transactions with third partiessuch as bill payments, bulk payments, and merchant paymentsup from just 14% in September 2012. By comparison, in East Africahome of the world's most successful mobile money deployments in terms of uptake, volumes, and transactionsonly 6% of all transaction volumes were considered ecosystem transactions.15 Ecosystem transactions are critical to realising the full potential of mobile financial services, although they are traditionally the most difficult products to gain traction in a mobile money market.
14. Transaction volumes exclude cash-in and cash-out. They include airtime top-ups, P2P transfers, bill payments, bulk payments, merchant payments, and international remittances.
Although cross-regional comparisons can be impractical due to vast differences between markets, the aggregate product mix in LAC provides a glimpse into the diversity of mobile money approaches employed. Unique supply- and demand-side factors at play in a given market influence commercial models and how the service is positioned. Therefore, the East African model for mobile money-driven by mobile operators and premised on "sending money home"may not be relevant in many LAC markets, as is further discussed in the next section.
A broad and diverse region, LAC has over 30 markets with populations ranging from tens of thousands of people to 150 million. Commercial models in LAC must therefore be examined through a narrow geographical lens and by grouping markets with common characteristics. For practical purposes, analysis is limited to markets with a population of over three million,16 and a GDP per capita of less than USD 15,000.17 These markets are mapped according to GDP per capita and corresponding penetration rates of accounts at financial institutions. While these two variables are not independent, they provide a spectrum by which to view how specific markets are developing in the region.18 Market segments emerged from this exercise and are illustrated in Figure 3 below.
17. Chile and Uruguay were omitted from analysis as GDP per capita is greater than USD 15,000.
At the bottom left of Figure 3 are 'Type I' marketsthe lowest-income markets in the region, which also tend to have the highest rates of financial exclusion on average. At the top right of the graph are 'Type II' markets relatively high-income markets that tend to have higher rates of financial inclusion, although there are exceptions. The markets in the middle group are likely to be hybrids of Type I and Type II markets, although they are also home to unique approaches to mobile financial services. We will discuss these distinct models later in this section.
19. Data sources include Global Findex 2014 and the World Bank (2013). Note that the analysis is limited to markets with populations over three million and a GDP per capita of less than USD 15,000, for which Global Findex data is available. Note that account penetration statistics for Paraguay are from 2011; Global Findex 2014 statistics are not available for Paraguay.
22. CGAP's global market archetypes, introduced in 2013, are based on GDP per capita relative to population density. Applying this framework to LAC markets yields a very similar set of market groupings. The rationale for modifying CGAP's approach to LAC markets was that they have similar levels of population density: most LAC markets are considered relatively low-density: only three markets have over 150 people per square kilometre. Population density metrics are most relevant when East Asia, South Asia, and the Pacific are part of the comparative analysis; no LAC market comes close to reaching the population density levels of Bangladesh, India and Indonesia.
25. Paulo A. Paranagua, 11 September 2012, "Latin America struggles to cope with record urban growth", The Guardian.
Mobile money could also help to meet a major need in urban areas: bill payment services. On average, 95% of people in LAC have access to electricity (compared to 32% in Sub-Saharan Africa).27 Processing bill payment transactions for utilities and other services used by urban residents via mobile money could meet this growing demand.
As we have seen in other regions, partnerships between mobile operators and financial institutionsto offer products such as mobile credit, savings, and insurancecan be a win-win. In Kenya, a savings and credit product jointly offered by the Commercial Bank of Africa (CBA) and Safaricom, M-Shwari, has made a major contribution to CBA's retail banking portfolio. In March 2015, M-Shwari reported 10 million accounts with over USD 1.6 billion in savings and over USD 300 million in loans. 39 40 This type of partnership is also yielding results in Paraguay. Tigo's partnership with Banco Familiar on a mobile credit product has attracted 50,000 new loan clients, most of whom were previously unbanked.
Mobile operators in Type I markets have made exciting progress and boast mobile money penetration rates that are amongst the highest in the world. However, there is still a long way to go to make the overall mobile money proposition more attractive for consumers and providers alike.
Type II markets are much wealthier than Type I markets, with average national GDPs exceeding Type I countries by roughly 3.5 times. Type II markets tend to share two major features. First, banks are deeply rooted in the economy and are strong contenders to become mobile financial services leaders in their respective countries. Brazil and Costa Rica, for example, have bank account penetration rates that are significantly above average for the region.41 Branchless banking models have contributed to the reach of the banking sector in Type II markets.
Thus, multiple strong contenders emerge for the provision of financial services. In some markets, mobile operators, banks and retailers willingly partner to leverage each other's assets. In others, strong lobbying by industry associations or regulatory restrictions result in partnership models not all parties approve of. Regardless of particular market dynamics, the upshot is that Type II markets tend to be more integrated with current financial and retail infrastructure: existing distribution networks are leveraged for cash-in/cash-out, companion cards are introduced to tap into point-of-sale infrastructure, and back-end interconnections can be made with national clearing and settlement systems. In this way, many mobile money deployments in Type II markets are born interoperable with the banking sector and begin to develop an ecosystem from the start.
The region is also home to extensive agent or correspondent banking networks. These networks help to extend the reach of the banking sector, although they are often part of bank branch decongestion strategies, rather than a tool for new customer acquisition.45 Nevertheless, these networks are becoming distribution points for mobile money services, particularly in Brazil, where banking correspondents are located in every municipality in the country. Approximately 150,000 correspondents are authorised to open mobile money accounts and perform cash-in/cash-out transactions on behalf of banks. The vast majority (over 90%) of these full-service outlets are agents for three prominent banks with mass market strategies: Banco do Brasil, Caixa Economica Federal, and Banco Bradesco.46 These banks have entered into commercial partnership agreements with mobile operators for mobile money services.
Remarkably, all but one mobile money deployment within Type II markets are integrated with banking infrastructure for distribution, either through agent banking networks or ATMs. By comparison, only three of nine deployments in Type I markets use existing banking infrastructure for distribution.
Nearly a third of all deployments in LAC offer companion cards, compared to just 16% of services in East Africa. Notably, close to 80% of deployments within Type II markets offer companion cards. For example, Zuum, a mobile money service offered through a joint venture between Telefonica and MasterCard in Brazil, offers companion cards for customers to access 1.8 million merchants that accept MasterCard and thousands of Cirrus ATMs across the country.
47. World Bank, 2011, "Payment Systems Worldwide: A Snapshot. Outcomes of the Global Payment Systems Survey 2010".
Although deployments around the world are beginning to experiment with this approach, it is a particular trend in large Latin American markets. Four mobile money deployments in BrazilZuum, Oi Carteira, Meu Dinheiro Claro, and TIM/Caixa Multibankoffer either a Visa or MasterCard-branded companion card. In Peru, a new companion card deployment, Tu Dinero Movil, was launched in the last six months as a joint venture between MasterCard and Movistar.
However, the recent wave of companion card launches is a sign that more mobile money providers are leveraging existing card acceptance networks to fast-track merchant payments. It also indicates that providers are finding it appealing to provide a channel that is familiarand often aspirationalto consumers. Companion cards also require less investment in customer education than a strictly mobile proposition.
Companion cards create unique marketing challenges for mobile money deployments. Not only do customers need to understand the concept and relative value of both channels, but a plastic card and mobile money wallet may have different value propositions for customers, which can affect a deployment's segmentation strategy and marketing tactics. For example, while both channels allow value to be stored and require cash-in/cash-out mechanisms, the mobile wallet is best suited to P2P/remote payments and bill payments that allow customers to initiate transactions from wherever they are. A card, on the other hand, is optimised mainly for merchant payments at retailers. Creating awareness and communicating the distinct functions of each form factor can be a challenge, especially in young mobile money markets.
OXXO, a franchised chain of convenience stores, has over 11,000 outlets in Mexico and is planning to expand into Colombia. As such, OXXO is an attractive commercial partner for mobile money deployments. In January 2014, Citibank's Mexican subsidiary, Banamex, introduced a new debit product in partnership with Visa and OXXO: Saldazo. A Saldazo account can be opened at any OXXO store in Mexico, where customers can also conduct cash-in/cash-out transactions, and can be linked to Banamex's mobile money service, Transfer.
Big box retailers can also play a role in mobile money distribution. Wal-Mart, for instance, is building a strong presence in Latin America, with more than 3,900 retail outlets. While more than half of its outlets are in Mexico, it also has a sizeable presence in Brazil, Chile, Costa Rica, and Guatemala.49 Commercial agreements with Wal-Mart are being sought for mobile money companion card sales and cash-in/cash-out transactions.
Two LAC markets in particular are introducing unique approaches to mobile financial services: Peru and Ecuador. In Peru, based on an initiative of the Association of Banks (ASBANC), a group of more than 30 e-money issuers are preparing to launch an open and interoperable e-money platform. In Ecuador, the central government is the only issuer of e-money, as established by a legal framework issued in 2014.50 While both are in early stages, these two approaches have already attracted international attention, and are described in further detail below.
Banks, non-bank financial institutions, the newly created e-money issuing entities (Entidades Emisoras de Dinero Electronico or EEDE) and the Peruvian Association of Banks are creating a unified value proposition for low-income consumers through a shared platform. Partnering with Ericsson, this group of e-money issuers is developing the platform. At a technical level, the aim is to create an e-money account-hosting environment that would service the accounts of all participating institutions in a central location. To facilitate the implementation and future administration, these partners have created a new company, Pagos Digitales Peruanos (PDP) S.A.
The Ecuadorian approach to mobile financial services is a policy approach rather than a commercial approach: the Central Bank of Ecuador (CBE) established itself as the sole e-money issuer in the country.53 Central banks do not normally offer retail banking services, but customers in Ecuador will now be able to open an e-money account at the CBE.
Setting up e-money distribution is expected to be a collaborative effort of the public and private sector.
Why did Ecuador adopt this unique and curious approach to mobile money? One reason is tied to the fact that since 2000, the US dollar has been the legal tender in the country. This means that the CBE incurs heavy cash management costs to maintain the nation's dollar supply and renew old bills. Should e-money become widely used and accepted, the government's cash management burden would diminish while CBE reserves could potentially increase.
(2) the implications of pulling cash-in circulation into the CBE instead of prudentially regulated financial institutions, and (3) oversight and compliance mechanisms in place for an e-money issuer that is also a regulator and financial authority.
This emerging e-money model in Ecuador demonstrates the complex interplay between commercial and government interests. An enabling policy and regulatory environment is critical for mobile financial services to flourish.
Allowing for competition in the provision of mobile money services is necessary, but not sufficient. Our analysis of service providers, based on data from the GSMA's Global Adoption Survey, has identified the additional elements required to unleash the potential of non-banks and enable the mobile money market to grow.
56. Simone di Castri, 2013, "Mobile Money: Enabling regulatory solutions", GSMA Mobile Money for the Unbanked (MMU).
 AND do not prescribe the implementation of specific interoperability models without allowing for a market-led approach.
Greater regulatory clarity has contributed to the growth of e-money services in LAC in recent years, though there's still a long way to go. In a region where money transaction services have traditionally been the business of banks, this requires a major shift in the mind-set of regulators and industry players.59 As of April 2015, six60 of 19 (32%) mobile money markets in LAC have an enabling environment for mobile money, up from only two in 2012 (Nicaragua and Peru). By comparison, ten of 13 (77%) East African mobile money markets and 47 of 89 (53%) live mobile money markets globally are considered 'enabling'.
Not all is dim, however. Taking a broader look at the enabling environment to achieve financial inclusion, beyond mobile money, five LAC markets rank in the global top 10 on overall scores in the Global Microscope: Peru, Colombia, Chile, Mexico and Bolivia.63 In addition, many financial institutions in LAC markets are beginning to innovate and close the financial access gap (i.e. Bancolombia and Davivienda in Colombia). Additionally, a few markets are allowing mobile operators to operate mobile money services sponsored by banking partners, or under domestic remittance licenses, in the absence of e-money regulation (i.e. El Salvador). Collectively, these factors explain why we see strong mobile money activity in markets that have not yet adopted enabling regulatory frameworks.
Brazil is a case in point, where three mobile money schemes were launched within six months of the central bank issuing a mobile payments bill (in May 2013) that allowed new and specialised legal entities for e-money issuers to be created under a license from the financial sector authority.64 While only one Brazilian deployment actually required the new payments license, the others only launched partnership models when the potential for competition from non-banks became a reality.
Several other countries are likely to adopt regulations enabling mobile money-specific licenses in the near future. For example, a financial inclusion bill has been drafted and presented to Congress in both El Salvador and Honduras. This will bring legal stability to the mobile money services already deployed in these markets and promote even more expansion.
66. Minimum capital requirements for e-money licenses tend to be in the order of USD 1 million. Colombia's specialized electronic deposit license has a minimum capital requirement of approximately USD 3 million.
Finally, a number of countries have implemented, or are in the process of implementing, financial inclusion strategies to align regulatory reforms with clearly defined and shared policy objectives. Government support for financial inclusion is in fact a key metric evaluated under the Global Microscope, which examines the inclusiveness of national financial sectors.
To date, mobile money in Colombia has been driven largely by traditional financial institutions. This has been due to a relatively strong financial sector, as well as regulatory restrictions for non-banks to issue e-money. Banking infrastructure in the country is extensive, with financial institutions located in 99% of municipalities and approximately 50,000 banking correspondents, yet only 38% of Colombian adults have an account at a formal financial institution.
A bill to create a special license for non-bank e-money issuers was submitted to Colombia's Congress in 2012. The bill faced strong opposition from a range of players, including the banking sector. The bill was approved in late 2014 and the regulation is being drafted amidst a consultation process, as of end of April 2015.
Based on the contents of the financial inclusion strategy, and the fact that the regulator is engaging in a consultative approach to issuing regulation, prospects for regulatory reform are promising.
Commercial models for mobile money cannot be examined in isolation. Banking and mobile telephony market structures, the regulatory environment, demographics, and many other market factors play a critical role in the development of new commercial models for mobile money. By reviewing the experiences of a subset of countries in the LAC, we are beginning to see a picture emerge of what could drive mobile money growth in the region, and the hurdles providers might encounter.
Type I marketsthe poorest countries in the region with relatively low banking penetration ratesare seeing some level of success with mobile operator-led models for mobile money. Nevertheless, these deployments will require new partnership development to offer an expanded range of products and services that drive value for consumers and improve the bottom line of the provider. Operators must be deliberate and intentional in building a digital financial services ecosystem and achieving interoperability with other providers in their markets.
Across the entire region, regulatory certainty will be essential to developing a healthy digital financial ecosystem. With adequate prudential regulations and risk-based know-your-customer procedures, mobile operators can safely issue e-money and contribute to financial integrity, stability, and growth. The industry eagerly awaits the regulatory certainty that will open the door to increased investment from banks and nonbanks alike, as well as yield more valuable products and services for consumers.
Bulk payment A payment made by an organisation via a mobile money platform to a person's mobile wallet. For example: salary payments made by an organisation to their employees' mobile wallet (B2P: business-to-person), payments made by a government to a recipient's mobile wallet (G2P), or payments made by development organisations to beneficiaries (D2P).
Cash-out The process by which a customer deducts cash from his mobile money account. This is usually via an agent who gives the customer cash in exchange for a transfer of e-money from the customer's mobile money account.
Interoperability The ability for customers to undertake money transfers between two accounts at different mobile money schemes, or to transfer money between accounts at mobile money schemes and accounts at banks. To date, mobile operators in four markets have interoperated their mobile money schemes.
Merchant payment A payment made from a mobile wallet via a mobile money platform to a retail or online merchant in exchange for goods or services. can help mobile money providers facilitate customer adoption and increase financial inclusion, especially in rural areas.
 The service allows subscribers to borrow a certain amount of money that they agree to repay within a specified period of time.
 The service must offer an interface for initiating transactions for agents and/or customers that is available on basic mobile devices.
 The service must allow subscribers to manage risks by providing a guarantee of compensation for specified loss, damage, illness, or death.
 The service must offer an interface for initiating transactions for agents and/or customers that is available on basic mobile devices.
 The service must offer at least one of the following services: P2P transfer, bill payment, bulk disbursement, merchant payment, and international remittance.
 The service must offer an interface for initiating transactions for agents and/or customers that is available on basic mobile devices.
Mobile money account An e-money account that is primarily accessed using a mobile phone and that is held with the e-money issuer. In some jurisdictions, e-money accounts may resemble conventional bank accounts, but are treated differently under the regulatory framework because they are used for different purposes (for example, as a surrogate for cash or a stored value that is used to facilitate transactional services). An active mobile money account is a mobile money account that has been used to conduct at least one transaction during a certain period of time (usually 90 days or 30 days).
Mobile network operator (MNO) Mobile savings uses the mobile phone to provide savings services to the underserved. MMU tracks mobile savings services that meet the following criteria:  The service allows subscribers to save money in an account that provides principal security, and in some cases an interest rate.  The service must allow underserved people to save money using a mobile device. Services that offer the mobile phone as just another channel to access a traditional savings account are not included.  The service must offer an interface for initiating transactions for agents and/or customers that is available on basic mobile devices.
Regulator In the context of mobile money, this typically refers to the regulator who has supervisory authority over financial institutions within a particular countryusually the central bank or other financial authority.
Underbanked Customers who may have access to a basic transaction account offered by a formal financial institution, but still have financial needs that are unmet or not appropriately met.