The idea behind JKS was to "reinvent" microfinance in a market where millions of poor people currently move their money around in digital form rather than in cash. Combining saving and borrowing in a single convenient product, JKS embraced the attributes of mobile delivery, including small low-cost transactions, personalized programs, and rapid customer-initiated progress through a structured "lend-to-save" program.
Nick Hughes and Gautam Ivatury are two of the founding members of Signal Point Partners, a company created in 2009 to build innovative mobile services in emerging markets. Nick was previously at Vodafone, where he started M-PESA, taking it from a concept to a multi-million-dollar business in five years. Gautam's previous role was leading the technology program at Consultative Group to Assist the Poor, where he focused on branchless and mobile banking.
Stuart Rutherford has worked extensively in microfinance for over three decades and is a practitioner of innovative services through his organization in Bangladesh called SafeSave. Stuart has published widely on the subject of the poor and their money and is regarded by many as one of the leaders in this sector.
Research that uses financial diaries to track how households manage money has confirmed that people with low, erratic incomes use a variety of techniques to help smooth this cash-flow problem,4 from the formal, such as a microfinance loan, to the informal, such as joining a rotating savings scheme.5 Although peoples' ability to manage so many financial mechanisms is impressive, the services they most prefer have traitsreliability, flexibility, structure, and conveniencethat are not always found in informal schemes. Moreover, informal finance often comes with a high risk of loss and ultimately with higher costs, many of which stem from the simple fact that these are cash based and subject to human error or sometimes fraud.
Mobile connections and mobile money provide a potential low-cost and secure channel for financial services, which allows providers to reduce overhead associated with traditional services, such as bricks-and-mortar branch networks, large teams of field officers, and manual data-crunching to manage accounts. These cost-saving opportunities provided by digital money have been well documented in recent years (see various CGAP publications7), and many service providers have taken on digital strategies to help reduce costs.
1. The ability to move small amounts of money around instantly, at a relatively low cost, in amounts and frequencies that can be determined by the user as well as the provider. This opens up a potential new business model and a move away from punitive interest charges by allowing transaction-based charging schemes to operate.
To many outsiders this system appears counter-intuitiveoffering a customer small amounts of credit to smooth cash flow while essentially forcing them to build their savings at the same time. But, in cash economies, these mental gymnastics underlie the normal day-to-day lives of many, as they must constantly calculate various credit and debit balances to meet their family's needs.
SafeSave runs P9 using "collectors"poor women with little more than a primary school education drawn from the low-income communities they serve. They visit each client each day to collect repayments on the interest-free P9 loans, of which half is disbursed in cash and half placed in a savings account for the client. The product has generated more interest and attracted greater flows of transactions per account than any of the other products SafeSave has launched in its 15-year history.
P9's unusual structure includes a number of features that poor clients find especially appealing. For example, loans may be "topped-up" to their original disbursed value at any time during the repayment cycle, with 20 percent of the amount thus re-borrowed going into the client's savings account. Most clients are sophisticated enough to understand that with P9, their savings balance soon exceeds their borrowing balance, and therefore these "top-ups" are essentially withdrawals of savings. Moreover, they appreciate the oddity that, as a result of the 20 percent that goes into savings, their nominal savings balance actually rises when they draw down liquidity, increasing rather than eroding the sense of security provided by their savings.
payments and disbursements. Out of this realization emerged a mobile-centric version of P9, which was called Jipange KuSavethe focus of this paper.
Still, the concept was neat and one that the team at MVK felt could be delivered via mobile, namely, a low-cost delivery channel that could offer personalization, direct contact, small transactions, and the framework around which to build a formal, structured proposition. The challenge was to discover (1) if there really was a customer need for a product like this, and (2) if a business model could be found to make it sustainable. FSD Kenya and CGAP responded to this challenge by funding a research project and enabling a trial to take place.
 The trial was to leverage Kenya's existing mobile money infrastructure and customer acceptance. There is probably no other market in the world where an entirely mobile proposition could be presented to a customer base that is familiar with mobile money.
 The team was determined that customers would shape the product, but the challenge with a new product is that you have to discover who the ideal customer is. This can only happen through a process of hypothesis testing, verification, and iteration.
Mohamed works as a taxi driver in Nairobi and has built up a base of loyal customers whom he drives to and from markets with their merchandise. These markets occur at different times in different parts of the city, and other factors like the weather and the seasonal nature of his clients' business make Mohamed's income variable. Mohamed has some fixed costs he must manage; at the start of each week he hires his taxi car, and once a term he pays school fees for his children. In some weeks, business is good and he manages the car hire easily and tries to put some surplus cash aside for his children's school fees. In one very quiet period, he had to take a short-term loan from a market "day lender" to cover the school fees and it took him several weeks to pay this off, making daily payments. Mohamed knows that he paid back much more than he borrowed and he doesn't want to take more loans like this. However, given his irregular cash flow and lack of documented evidence of income, he cannot get a loan from a bank or MFI. Jipange KuSave worked very well for him. The very first loan helped him in a particularly quiet week to meet the cost of his following week's car hire. Mohamed could also chose when to pay back and he did this after a few busy days on the taxi business. After about a month, he moved to the second loan. He was pleased to see his savings building up and he understood that he could draw new loans in cycles that aligned with school fee payment dates. Although the JKS trial is now completed, Mohamed expressed an interest in building large savings through this type of product, potentially saving enough to buy his own car.
Although no interest was payable on the loans or on the customers' savings, fees were charged to this first cohort to set up accounts and for each loan disbursement. For a small subgroup, MVK required a pre-loan deposit to be built up before the first loan was disbursed, an idea used to test whether the requirement to save first would deter sign-up. It did deter sign-up, not surprisingly, largely because nobody had heard of MVK or JKS and so there was an unwillingness to start with savings coming from the customer. This product design option was dropped from the pilot.
Peter runs a juice stall in a market. He uses his previous day's income to buy fruit first thing in the morning and prepares a range of juice mixes. He has very little surplus cash to branch out or expand his product line, as all his disposable income supports his wife and children. The children are too young for the wife to leave home and find work. On hearing about JKS, Peter took the first loan to buy ingredients for his wife to make small cakes at home, which he then sold with the juice. Within a week he was able to pay the full amount back and take the second loan. He continued to sell the cakes and branched into more juice mixes with the second loan, and even managed to buy some new glasses to serve the juice in. With his saving growing, Peter had set his sights on some major investments in his business, including setting up a permanent juice bar close to the market.
With the basic hypothesis supported, the team set out to test all of the variables that could drive a commercially sustainable savings scheme. Much of Phase II was shaped by direct feedback from the first successful users, especially the group of super performers for whom the JKS product had clearly worked well and who had moved very quickly through several loan cycles and built sizable savings. From JKS's perspective, these were the ideal customers: they were rapidly driving revenue by moving on to new loan steps and quickly becoming net depositors (zero risk).
A critical element of any mobile-orientated service is accurate, real-time information on key performance indicators. Throughout Phase I, the entire customer account management system and means of tracking customer interactions had run on an Excel spreadsheet model. With the intended scale-up of customers, it was critical to make this system more robust and automated. Operating procedures were redesigned and a set of functional requirements was written to provide a blueprint for a web-based account management tool. This information management system automated and tracked much of the day-to-day interaction with customers and generated reports, thus giving the JKS team real-time access to customer details, balances, payments, communications history, etc.
All the variables in the business model were tested (see table 1), including how customers were originated, with distribution channels ranging from M-PESA agents to customer referrals, what proportion of a loan was retained as savings, and who paid what transaction charges. Six parallel cohorts were run, which combined different product features in six distinct locations across Nairobi and rural Kenya.
finances. Males under age 30 with no dependents were typically bad about repaying. Using various third-party channels to collect basic information, some screening could be done using demographic data collected when customers signed up, but what proved most effective was instituting a "savings plan call" for all prospective customers. This involved the JKS customer services team holding a structured telephone interview with each customer to gauge their response to predetermined questions about their intention to save, their need for a loan, their reasons for saving, the likely timing of their repayment, and so on. This interview was used to score customer's potential and determine whether or not they should be offered the first loan, but it also provided a key opportunity to establish the tone of the relationship and set out clear expectations before making a first transaction.
To be clear, the loans in JKS were interest free and there were no penalties for failure to repay, but should the customer simply "disappear" from contact, JKS's last resort was to claim back any outstanding credit from the accumulated savings. Customers' rate of repayment influenced the level of interaction they had with the JKS customer service team through calls and text messages, but these interactions were intended to remind the customer of the benefits of reaching the next loan stage and to help them prioritize making repayments to build their savings. The JKS team also introduced small cash incentives (paid to the savings account) for customers who achieved their monthly target, thereby emphasizing the carrot and not the stick. Feedback from the customers showed that they liked this aspect of the structured repayment program.
The results from Phase II allowed the team to firm up some of the assumptions in the business model, and confidence grew in the financial projections that were based on observed customer repayment behavior. One example was that most customers gradually increased the size of their repayments in keeping with the larger loans they were receiving. This had not been part of the initial hypothesis, and in fact this behavior indicated potentially lower operating costs than originally predicted (given reduced total number of M-PESA transactions and associated fees).
Frederick was a JKS customer through Phase I and remained a customer in Phase II of the trial. He repaid his loans at a rate that was typical of other customers, but after a few weeks of the Phase II trial starting, the customer care team noticed a sudden acceleration in Frederick's repayments as he moved through two loan cycles in three days. When they asked why, Frederick said that his daughter had been awarded a scholarship at a well-regarded secondary school. This was a pleasant surprise, given the competition for places at this school. However, there was a condition that Frederick meet some of his daughter's costs. He had to do this on quite short notice and didn't want to miss the opportunity. He felt that JKS offered the quickest way to find the money because he had enough disposable income to move quickly through two loan cycles, which would allow him to draw down the relatively large amount of Ksh 20,000 to meet all the school costs in one go. This example clearly shows the benefits of being in a structured program where the customer determines the pace. Because of examples like this, the JKS team focused on automating a system of "next loan" notification in an effort to build confidence among their customers that they could drive their own progress and would get a rapid response from JKS. Once the accounting system received notification that an individual had completed a loan step, the next loan could be dispersed within an hour, subject to SMS-based confirmation coming back from the customer. Customers routinely cited the speed of response as a strong attribute of JKS.
However, sharing our financial model with some trusted advisors quickly raised an interesting debate. Charging a flat fee for a loan that pays zero interest can be translated into a staggering APR. For example, if a customer pays a 5 percent fee (Ksh 100/US$1) to take a first loan of Ksh 2,000 (about US$20), plus M-PESA transaction fees at Ksh 10 per repayment, and if he or she takes one month to pay this back, they are paying an equivalent APR of over 85 percent! By any traditional measure, that is a massive cost.
Note: From top to bottom, the key entries correspond to pie slices, starting in the top right and continuing clockwise.
For a wider perspective on interest-bearing or transaction-charge models, see Portfolios of the Poor*, but the underlying point here is that the financial service must be relevant to the customer needs and fairly priced to make it commercially sustainable. Transaction-based charging was shown to work for JKS.
So, a final group of customers was recruited, some of them from the Phase II cohorts but many of them new to JKS. By now the team had a good handle on the cost of servicing their customer base and were able to track it using a refined, cloud-hosted customer relationship management and accounting tool. Figure 3 shows the breakdown of the cost and revenue drivers in this phase for a Ksh 25,000 savings plan paid over 12 months.
Results from Phase III began to affirm assumptions made in the revised business model, which stated that to achieve a reasonable return on investmentin this case, a three-year target return on investment of 30 percentit would be necessary to develop a customer base of around 300,000 over three years, with the bulk of these customers having target savings of either Ksh 15,000 or Ksh 25,000. On paper this was achievable, given the size and growth rate of other microfinance providers in East Africa, but two big issues remained: first, how to get a license to operate, and second, how, with no prior market presence, to build a trusted brand and rapidly increase the customer base.
After nearly two years of effort, the MVK team has built up considerable evidence that JKS is a product that customers like, its immediate liquidity and convenient savings features solve a real problem, andmost excitinglyit can be delivered to the mass market of low-income customers through the mobile channel.
The challenge is that only licensed institutions are permitted to take most financial services (and all savings products) to market. In other words, the very organizations that are narrowly focused on serving the most profitable high-income customers, hold the key to unlocking the potential of relevant digital services for the low-income massesand they are the only entities licensed to so operate. In some ways, this parallels the innovator's dilemma, as it encapsulates the problem incumbents face when having to allocate resources to the next new thing, which typically means serving new customers at lower margins. With a short horizon instilled through a culture of annual performance metrics, it is indeed rational for senior managers in these organizations to avoid pursuing growth in these harder and lower return segments. In markets with lower barriers to entry, change can arise from disruptive new entrants with a focus on these untapped segments; however, as consumer deposits rightly remain a major focus for regulatory protection, innovation in financial services will continue to be inhibited as the changes required rely heavily on the incumbents.
Until this occurs, the MVK team will continue to test new mobile-centric financial and nonfinancial propositions across Africa and India. There are many similar products just waiting to be tested and refined, some that go even further in embracing the connectivity made possible by mobile technology. It will be an exciting future if policymakers and regulators stand true to the vision of financial inclusion, if investors continue to realize the potential for major disruptive shifts in the provision of financial services, and if suitable routes to market are created for new providers of relevant financial products.
1. Building a clear hypothesis as to (1) what we want to learn from this iteration and (2) what our hypothesis is as to what will happen; Eric Ries, Lean Startup.
5. Also called a merry-go-round, whereby participants contribute regularly to a group fund, then take their respective turns to withdraw the total pot once.