Perhaps it's too much to expect two epochal waves of change in one decade and we need to give mobile money more time. Or perhaps the idea of financial inclusion is itself a threadbare hope: there may be neither sufficient demand for formal banking among poor people who have evolved "good enough" ways to manage what little they have, nor sufficient revenue among commercial providers to sustain what would be a large number of new formal accounts. Or perhaps we are simply missing the socioeconomic changes that mobile money already brings to the poor because we are too wedded to traditional notions of financial inclusion.
Ignacio Mas is a consultant in the field of mobile money and financial inclusion. He was formerly deputy director of Financial Services for the Poor at the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. He has written widely for publications such as Innovations, Challenge, The International Economy, World Economy, World Development, and The Journal of Payments Strategy and Systems, and is coauthor of "Branchless and Mobile Banking Solutions for the Poor: A Survey of the Literature," which appears in this issue.
 Second, mobile money is bringing convenience and immediacy to people's handling of moneyin essence, it's putting money on the grid. The economic and social implications are hard to fathom because money is used in so many different contexts, for so many different purposes, and in so many different ways. Wethe "royal we" of the global development communityrisk bringing old baggage to bear when we evaluate mobile money exclusively through the prism of financial inclusion. "Banking the unbanked" just might not look as we first expected it to lookthat is, mobile money versions of bank-like products.
The predominant model to date is driven by mobile operators, who are combining their 24/7 access to customers with cash-in/cash-out points to deliver an exponential value-add over banks, especially those that have ignored low-income customers. A secondary model is driven by banks that are using mobile outreach to facilitate access to systems for existing and some new customers. In both cases, the mobile operator and the bank are seeking to cement their existing relationships with customers.
Digital moneywhich is mere digits on a bank's serveris easier to conceal, transport, and deliver than physical cash, and hence is safer and cheaper to use in many settings. Digital money leaves information in its wake, which can be used automatically to build up financial histories for individuals or accounting records for businesses. It is feasible to pay interest on digital money, or to index its value to a range of benchmarks, thereby reducing the risk of inflation.
It is therefore unduly limiting to judge the success of branchless banking in terms of a narrow, preconceived set of applications, such as access to standard savings and checking accounts. Success will be fully achieved when everyone uses their money and payment utility for a variety of overlapping reasons. The overall impact of this utility on people's lives should be measurable, but not attributable to only a few distinct uses, such as remittances or online payments.
cy of informal peer networks. It is used as a financial tool for people to help each other, and as such is of immense social and economic value. Researchers Billy Jack of Georgetown University and Tavneet Suri of MIT are currently studying how M-PESA allows families to resist idiosyncratic adverse shocksin effect using mobile money as an informal insurance mechanism. This category also includes informal, community-based rotating savings groups that use mobile money as a channel to capture contributions.
Government efficiency and less corruption. Much recent interest in branchless banking has been stimulated by its potential for helping governments deliver micropayments. Doing so in cash is expensive, whereas doing so electronically is cheap and fastand quite possibly more productive. Government is typically the largest micropayer in a country, and many of these payments go to people living in remote areas, such as teachers in rural schools or pensioners who return to their home village upon retirement. The volume of social welfare payments has also increased substantially in recent years; for instance, those made to demobilized soldiers in the Congo, conditional cash transfers to poor families under the Bolsa Familia Program in Brazil, or subsistence wages paid under the National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme in India. Branchless banking can therefore enhance the reach and efficiency of government social safety nets and reduce the corruption associated with the administration of these programs. In many cases, these government-to-person payments are delivered through banking institutions, which provides another linkage point for the previously unbanked.
Development agencies and donors have identified financial inclusion as the high bar of the benefits of branchless banking. Financial inclusion is a fuzzy term, but it typically refers to connecting people to "formal" (that is, licensed, regulated, and appropriately governed) financial institutions. Therefore, advocates of financial inclusion tend to put as much or more emphasis on the design of financial products as on the design of the payment capability underpinning them.
Four years into the spectacular success of M-PESA in Kenya, no other mobile money system even comes close to showing that level of customer adoption and usage. True, there are some encouraging signs: Vodacom's M-PESA in Tanzania and MTN MobileMoney in Uganda have more than one million active accounts. Telenor's EasyPaisa in Pakistan and the SmartMoney and G-Cash operations in the Philippines are also significant, with more than eight million customers between them, although they are seeing only a limited take-up of wallet (i.e., account-based) services.
Even M-PESA, despite its spectacular level of take-up, remains very limited in how people use it. Most M-PESA transactions start and end in cash; it has in essence supplemented rather than displaced cash, and most customers use it only a couple of times a month. M-PESA does not offer easy programming interfaces for linking into enterprise systems, and the information value of its customer transactions is used rarely, if at all, for business or credit-scoring purposes.
Thus, in looking forward, the focus should be first on the business implementation to scale and profit, rather than on the notion of financial inclusion. The question is, what is preventing telecoms and banks from doing just that? If their respective DNA is an impediment, perhaps third parties should be encouraged to implement mobile money and to use the mobile platform and new banking regulations as leverage to compete with incumbents.
The complexity of these schemes requires that both actors approach the idea more holistically. The idea is not only about converting or acquiring customers but about delivering sufficient value to stores that are acting as cash merchants. Moreover, it's important to give businesses a way to pay their employees and casual laborers electronically, to collect bill payments electronically, to take cash out of supply chains so they can run more efficiently, and in the process drive stores to prefer to accept electronic payments over cash. Without a broader perspective that includes ecosystem development, most providers will not have the wherewithal to drive mobile money or branchless banking forward at sufficient scale and speed.
Building the necessary cash merchant networkthe stores where people can cash in and cash out from their digital accountsis hard work, for two main reasons. First, each store needs sufficient volume in order to maintain the necessary stock of electronic money and physical cashthat is, inventory. Creating that volume of business at every locality represents a very large number of transactions, which few providers can achieve. Second, the viability of the cash-in/cash-out channel depends on having many customers, which can create a chicken-and-egg problem. Customers won't be attracted to the service if they don't see a vibrant, reliable network of cash-in/cash-out stores that can meet their needs. The longer providers take to break this cyclethat is, the slower they are in getting both customers and stores on boardthe more difficult it will be to market the service, as people will become annoyed with the marketing message and there will be little word-of-mouth promotion. Furthermore, the business case will become more complicated due to accumulated losses. Breaking this cycle requires careful, effective action and sufficient resources to reach the two sides of the market: end-users and cash merchants.
Consider the case of an African country that has 50 percent mobile phone penetration and the largest player has a 40 percent market share. Assuming optimistically that this dominant mobile operator converts 50 percent of its customer base to mobile money, this represents a payment ecosystem touching just 10 percent of the population (50% x 40% x 50%). That is simply not enough to create a compelling proposition to users, and most likely not enough transactions volume to create a viable business case for a sufficiently large number of cash merchants. Even this dominant operator might be better off interconnecting with the mobile money and branchless banking schemes of other telecoms and banks. Yet this is not happening anywhere, as both telecoms and banks want to go it alone, despite the obvious fact that their efforts are going to be subscale.
One big problem is pricing, which makes small-value transactions expensive via mobile. Lower pricing might induce people to substitute mobile payments for cash in their daily lives, and thus trigger a much higher volume of mobile money transactions, with all their known benefits. So far, most schemes have gone for the high-price model. M-PESA in Kenya has in fact gone as far as pricing purely electronic money transfers more expensively than cash-in/cash-out transactions which in effect makes cash cheaper.
When envisioning a large-scale information utility for making electronic payments, cash is the enemy. People love cash because they are conditioned to use it. They used to love cowrie shells and dogs' teeth too, but their preferences evolved as new forms of payment came along. They can do so again. Cash must be excised from the system as much as possible for all the reasons mentioned above if it is to fully scale and transform society. It would certainly lower costs for banks and telecoms and move more money into their systems.
Most importantly, dematerializing cash would begin to develop mobile money as a pervasive, large-scale, digital-information utility that is of value to all players, including the very poor. That would give entrepreneurs a viable platform on which to develop rich products to serve different segments of the population, and might begin to make financial inclusion a reality. That version of financial inclusion is not likely to look like the one we now envisionsome sort of expansive banking system that pushes the same products you and I enjoy. It is likely to assume a whole new set of characteristics based on usage needs and local customs, which is precisely what happened with the spread of mobile phones.