One bright spot in the region, however, is payments. Aithough the rate of increase is smaiier than in the past, credit card spend is stiii growing. E-commerce is robust, with projected doubie-digit growth for the next severai years. Locai fintech startups are disrupting ageoid financiai systems Like Lending and scores of mobiie waiiet Launches demonstrate investor determination to usher in the next wave of payment technoiogy. And with ~75,000 users in its first month, BIM, a new mobiie money piatform in Peru may be changing the nature of financiai inciusion.
To do this, banks are shifting their investment doiiars away from credit cards in sharp contrast to their retaii strategy over the past 20 years. Few of the region's Largest markets saw the Launch of personai credit cards in 2015. Instead, banks and acquirers are investing in everything digitai, inciuding oniine banking piatforms, mobiie apps, digitai waiiets, mPOS and support for e-commerce. BBVA in Mexico reports that improvements to its oniine offering, inciuding oniine Lending and a digitai waiiet, have resuited in attracting two miiiion users to the oniine channei in just 18 months compared to the 1.5 miiiion users it attracted over the previous 10 years. The digitai channei is here to stay and wiii oniy become more entrenched. Credit cards stiii iie at the center of retaii bankingissuers are simpiy impiementing technoiogy to heip consumers use them in new ways. This is smart.
The mobiie phone is at the center of payment innovation for the unbanked as weii. Payment companies continue to Look for ways to convert paper money into digitai currency, nameiy in the form of stored vaiue on ceii phones. Teicos have been trying to achieve this for years without great success, but market piayers are not giving up. A trend toward interoperabiiity, ied by the Peruvians, may provide best practices for success. PayPai recentiy announced partnerships with Teicei and Ciaro to support mobiie money; TransferTo, a mobiie money hub for teicos, announced an aiiiance with Tigo, to heip scaie Tigo Money. Last year, Huawei expressed interest in mobiie money in Coiombia. No one has Learned how to turn a profit on financiai services for the unbanked, so the continued interest in such products is puzziing. Everyone is optimisticaiiy betting on capturing a piece of a pie that does not yet exist.
Smartphone penetration in the region is roughly 45% in 2016, totaling 175 million, and is forecasted to grow by 12% annually through 2019. In four years' time, 73% of Chileans and 70% of Mexicans will have smartphones. So banks have refocused on smartphone-based financial solutions namely, contactless mobile payments and digital wallets for e-commerce.
2015 saw the launch of at least six mobile wallets for contactless payments at brick-and-mortar merchants, involving big players such as MasterCard, Bancolombia, and BBVA Bancomer. This year, PROSA, and Grupo Aval threw their hats in the ring and SamsungPay launched in Brazil. BBVA plans to launch the first mobile wallet in Peru in 2017. Despite a lack of evidence that such technologies will gain traction, investment in digital payments is going full steam ahead. Developing merchant networks and providing consumer incentives for mobile payments will be crucial for their success.
Apart from Brazil, NFC POS penetration in Latin America is low (e.g. 5% in Colombia) and NFC-enabled smartphones (such as the iPhone 6) are very few in number compared to Android-based handsets. Undeniably, the solutions most likely to succeed are those that are cheap and easy to roll out and not dependent on the installation of new hardware. With such low NFC infrastructure and the dominance of Android in the region, the launch of ApplePay in Latin America is likely far off, giving local solutions and SamsungPay the chance to battle for leader status.
PayPal and Visa are leading the charge in streamlining e-commerce transactions. Visa launched its digital wallet Visa Checkout in Mexico, Colombia and Brazil last year, in an effort to increase conversion rates. Although the Visa Checkout launches were highly publicized events, the momentum in signing up additional merchants seems to have waned in 2016. PayPal launched is OneTouch feature globally in Q2 2016, enabling customers to make one-click purchases. Banks, historically overzealous in refusing e-commerce transactions for fear of fraud, are recognizing this missed opportunity: In 2016 they have sought to enhance the consumer e-commerce experience through improved anti-fraud and authentication tools.
During banks' romantic pursuit of the underbanked, they took their sights off the needs and wants of their most valuable customer base. Latin America's wealthy have long been weary of conventional credit products and reward programs that do not reflect who they are. Today, affluent Latin Americans are hungry consumers of international goods, services, and content: They pine after the technologies available in the developed world. Banks must honor these aspirations if they want to capture the loyalty of the big spenders of today (middle-aged professionals) and tomorrow (technology driven 20-somethings). To do this, they must enable technology-based payments and consumption.
card at a POS. Banks, processors and payment gateways must collaborate to convince consumers it is safe to buy online, and merchants need assistance building clean, professional online stores. Finally, once new payment technologies are accepted by the region's upper-crust users, market players must pursue strategies to target the traditional and emerging middle classes, especially by expanding access to electronic payment methods.
E-commerce retail sales in Latin America will exceed USD $50 billion in 2016, according to eMarketer . Compare this to US retail e-commerce, clocking in at USD $341 billion in 2015 , and Latin American e-commerce looks decidedly underdeveloped. The reasons for this are well known: bank rates hover at around 30% and fear of fraud deters even affluent credit card holders from shopping online. A lesser-understood reason is that local e-commerce payment enablers and banks lack some technological expertise, resulting in too many authentic transactions being declined.
The good news is that e-commerce in Latin America is expected to grow by 15% annually through 2019by as much as 11% in Brazil and 40% in Peru. Organic growth is part of the reason but so is a concerted effort by payment enablers to improve the customer experiencean opportunity that is inviting ever more competition.
1) existing leaders will expand into new markets and improve their product offering; 2) local startups will enter the market; and 3) new international gateways will arrive in Latin America for the first time.
But where PayPal, PayU and MercadoPago have achieved regional recognition, other gateways have faltered. The region is littered with less sophisticated companies that have unstable and insecure platforms, which can result in dismal conversion rates of under 50%. As consumers climb the e-commerce learning curve, their user experience expectations increase and merchants become less tolerant of shoddy service.
New local players want to capitalize on the mediocre service of incumbents. Conekta, established in Mexico in 2012, enables advanced features less commonly found in Latin America, including recurring payments, card-on-file and anti-fraud tools that negate the need for authorization via 3D Secure . Similar launches include AstroPay, which specializes in enabling local payment methods for crossborder e-commerce, and Peru's Culqui, catering to the m-commerce market. As these companies consolidate in their home countries, we can expect regional expansion, with a focus on small and medium businesses that need excellent customer service and intuitive tools.
  De Nale, R. and D. Weidenhamer. 2015. "Quarterly Retail E-Commerce Sales, 4th Quarter 2015," US Census Bureau.
to local providers. Emerging local competition is trouble for international gateways, including 2Checkout, Adyen, and Global Collect, which face the disadvantage of not being plugged into local processors in all markets. As such, transactions are charged in foreign currencies and consumers are assessed FX fees. Merchant earnings are stored abroad, necessitating costly wire transfers to the local market.
This does not stop new international players from being attracted to Latin America in the belief that they can outwit or outmuscle the region's local solutions. The most prominent example is Stripe, which is in pursuit of the burgeoning m-commerce segment. Stripe wants to launch its own product in beta phases in Brazil and Mexico to serve the underpenetrated segment of in-app payments and payments via social media. It faces little or no competition in this endeavor.
One downside for international merchants, however, is the complexity of the e-commerce enablement landscape from a regional perspective. There is no one provider to enable e-commerce for all of Latin America, a disappointment for merchants expecting an easy LatAm solution. Gateways that 1) have presence in multiple markets and 2) enable local payment solutions, such as PayU and AstroPay, have the best shot at international merchants and their lucrative cross-border sales. But international merchants unfamiliar with these lesser-known brands are often gun-shy when it comes to using a local solution. Regardless, a multi-faceted approach to Latin American e-commerce is required.
  3D Secure is technology offered by Visa and MasterCard for card-not-present transactions, which requires the user to authenticate his/her identity, thereby enhancing securing. However, authentication adds an additional step to any e-commerce transaction and results in significantly lower authorization rates. Gateways are attempting to bypass the process using their own security features.
Both merchants and consumers have yet to navigate the m-commerce learning curve. Estimates are that In Brazil, for Instanceby far the region's most mature market fewer than 5% of merchants have an m-commerce site, forcing mobile customers through a clumsy, non-optlmlzed shopping experience. Card-on-file features are scarce, requiring users to enter their 16-dIgIt card number for each individual purchase. High-speed Internet has expanded Impressively In recent years but Is still limited: 50% of mobile connections are still covered by 2G'  . As a result, m-commerce represents less than 10% of total e-commerce sales region-wide.
In Mexico, Colombia and Chile and reach 57% regionwide. Additionally, by 2020 the GSMA expects 75% of all mobile connections to be covered by 4G and many Latin Americans will come online for the first time via a mobile device. As a result, In 2016 mobile commerce sales Is growing by 40%-60%, depending on the market.
Certain segments will champion this growth much more than others. Transportation has been one of the first segments to excel In m-commerce, led by Brazil's Easy Taxi and followed by Uber. In Latin America's traffic-choked cities, the on-demand economy Is a major driver of m-commerce for other types of products as well. The region already has a strong culture of cheap, same day delivery much more so than the USfor virtually any type of product, from medication to hard liquor to fresh steaks.
Take IFood, Brazil's largest online marketplace for restaurant delivery services. Founded In 2011, IFood allows consumers to browse nearby takeout options and make orders online. With 200,000+ delivery orders per month75% of them placed via mobileIFood estimates It Is capturing 80% of the online takeout market valued at USD $1.5 billion.
 Ruvolo, J. 2015. "IFood Raises USD $50 Million From Movlle And Just Eat For Food DelIvery,"Tech Crunch.
Restaurant food is only a small slice of the enormous delivery market being disrupted by m-commerce. Rapiddo is an Uber-style service providing on-demand package delivery via motorbike, bicycle or van. In Sao Paulo, where traversing the city can take longer than an international flight, such services are embraced wholeheartedly.
MUV, a Brazilian mobile marketing firm, is finding ways around this. It has developed a product enabling consumers to surf merchant sites on their cell phones for free without consuming any data. A pilot launched in November 2015 with Netshoes, a popular sporting goods e-retailer, yielded astounding results. In the month of November, mobile surpassed desktops in visits for the first time ever and 3G visits experienced higher conversion rates than Wi-Fi visits. App downloads grew by 150% and the mobile channel now accounts for 40% of all NetShoes' online traffic.
But in other, more underdeveloped markets, the preference for cash remains a huge barrier to m-commerce. Mexico is a prime example. According to a study conducted by BuzzCity, a mobile advertising company, Mexican m-commerce is heavily concentrated in two product categories: mobile airtime top-ups and mobile content.
made an m-commerce purchase . The most often-cited reason for hesitancy is fear that mobile transactions are not secure; the runner-up is a strong preference to pay in cash. Of Mexican m-commerce customers, only 5% report that a credit card is their preferred payment optiontrailing behind carrier billing, cash payments at authorized agents and cash on delivery.
apps such as Uber and Cabify. Moreover, airtime top-ups were not even available for purchase via mobile apps until July 2015, when MNO Entel partnered with VisaNet to develop a card-on-file app. Using the app, customers can now top up their mobile accounts and pay monthly bills after registering a Visa card. Entel represents only 7% share of mobile users, however. Telecom giants Movistar and Claro have not yet developed these capabilities. In Argentina, with a robust, tech-savvy middle class, demand for digital goods and services is severely repressed for lack of electronic payment methods; cash still represents 40% of all online spend.
Additionally, markets outside of Brazil are Just as ripe for disruption in terms of m-commerce delivery services, but for the strong preference of paying with cash. Credit card penetration goes as low as 21% in Peru, precluding access to card-only m-merchants to a huge percentage of the population. Although costly to merchants, enabling cash-on-delivery attracts first-time users to m-commerce, especially those with no other device through which to place orders. While mobile will grow, organic growth can only take merchants and payment providers so far; smart innovation around local problems is essential to win.
Having first experienced success in Africa, mobile money attempts to provide financial services to the unbanked by converting the mobile phone into a digital wallet. In Latin America, where 70% of people do not have a bank account, investment in mobile money has gained ground steadily in the region since 2007. At the end of 2014", there were 37 live services deployed in Latin America and the region is leading the world in mobile money user growth (50% in 2014) . There were five new mobile money launches in 2015 and two regional giants, PayPal and America Movil, partnered to create a mobile money wallet in 2016.
According to the GSMA, the road toward profitability is a long one and it usually takes between 36 and 48 months to achieve Just 2-5% profit margins. To do so, operators must invest in the development of a robust digital payments ecosystem. Interestingly enough, it is the region's newest deployments that are doing this through investments in interoperability.
2015 and 2016 have been milestone years for Latin America, as they saw unprecedented progress in mobile money. This progress was characterized by the launch of the world's first mobile money service operated by a Central Bank in Ecuador and the development of a fully interoperable platform in Peru.
Ecuador made global headlines for its Dinero Electronico, a government-run mobile money service launched in Q1 2015. Ecuador's Central Bank, the world's first to issue electronic money, created interoperability by striking deals with both Claro and Movistar.
" Almazan, M. and Jennifer Frydrych. 2015. "Mobile Financial Services in Latin America and the Caribbean: State of play, commercial models and regulatory approaches' GSMA.
Despite widespread skepticism, Ecuador's mobile platform is the region's premiere money service and the first to be truly low-cost to both consumers and merchants. There is no doubt that Ecuador, one of the poorest countries in South America, needs expanded access to financial services, and some believe Dinero Electronico is the first step in this direction. Others believe it is doomed to fail.
Facilitating utility bill payment may be the best strategy toward this end. Across Latin America, consumers experience the inconvenience of shockingly long lines to pay for utilities such as water and electricity. Peer-to-peer payments offer a practical solution but well-entrenched money wiring firms are already top-of-mind among remittance senders. For either BIM or Dinero Electronico to flourish, they must 1) make the lives of their customers more convenient; and 2) displace models that already attempt to do this. If they succeed at these two tasks, consumers may be convinced that mobile money is worth the trouble after all.
Very few mobile money services in LAC have reached profitability. As a result, some providers have migrated away from the unbanked. Banks and card networks are dedicating significant resources to launch services for their banked customers, including m-commerce mobile wallets and contactless merchant payments.
Growth of smartphone usage aside, there may be another reason to target more high-tech consumers. Mobile money uptake has been so low in part because its main users are marginalized, poorly educated and highly suspicious of banks and technology. But the unbanked population is diverse and includes young, lower middle-class urban dwellers who, in many cases, have smartphones. These users are more tech-savvy and adaptive than feature phone users, and thus are more likely to trade in old behaviors for new ones. With regard to mobile money, smartphone users would be more inclined to trust that their cash is stored safely in their phone and to be more excited about sending money to friends electronically than their feature phone counterparts.
Fear of deportation motivates protecting anonymity and the trust generated between remitters and in-person agents promotes customer loyalty. For these reasons, retail remittances are well-entrenched. Yet despite decades of success, market incumbents are now coming under threat by online providers.
Although still a relatively new phenomenon, online remittances are posing a significant threat to traditional players. By 2011, Western Union's fees had dropped by over 50% since 2001 and margins fell below 1% in 2013. Faced with a fierce price war, MTO no longer counts on fees as a principal source of profit. Now, income comes from managing its foreign exchange spread. With more competition, cost pressure will increase and retail MTOs will migrate an increasing number of customers to the digital channel as they shrink their agent network. The 2015 acguisition of Xoom by PayPal indicates big payment companies' interest in this growing business and the opportunity to capitalize on the trend toward digitalization.
their place are poor, often undocumented and have the same barriers to online remittances as the generation of migrants before them. Remittances as a product necessarily targets low-income demographics with low technological literacy: cash-in therefore remains a mainstay of the industry.
provider TransferTo, enables mobile top-ups in 15 Latin American markets. Some users prefer this option since the funds go directly to pay for services chosen by the remitter, guaranteeing that the funds go to good use. Bill payments save friends and families in Latin America lengthy trips to the bank to pay for utilitiesa serious time constraint for people living in rural areas or underserved urban neighborhoods. Growing at an estimated 10% annually, airtime remittances capitalize on the major opportunity to capture small value transfers cost-effectively. Most such transfers are for values less than USD $20.
The restrictions on mortgages and loans are more striking. As of December 2015, Mexico's total mortgage portfolio totaled $37 billion'. To put this in context, in Q2 2015 alone, banks in the US issued USD $225 billion in new mortgages, dwarfing Mexico's entire portfolio. Per capita, Mexico's mortgage market comes out to just USD $376 per person; in the US, this number is USD $8,314. The story is the same for personal loans: the per capita non-revolving personal loan portfolio in Mexico is a total USD $193. In the US, it is USD $1,922. In addition to being scarce, capital in Mexico is also exponentially more expensive than in the US; credit card APRs commonly reach well above 50%. Interest rates on personal loans are usually upwards of 40%.
Payday loans in Mexico did see a surge in 2015 of 18%', given a more formalized labor force, but only at the expense of the credit card market, which shrank by three million cards since 2014'. Overall, banks remain hesitant to issue personal loans, restricting lending to the wealthy.
Kubo's business model depends on attracting investors and convincing them that the reward is worth the risk. Surprisingly, 35% of Kubo's investors are millennials between the ages of 18 and 32. These budding investors make average deposits of USD $1,600 and are the company's fastest-growing customer segment. Another 40% are Generation X-ers ranging from 32 to 55 years old, investing an average of USD $6,000. Kubo is capitalizing on an underserved market in Mexico's investment space: the young, affluent, and tech-savvy who have faith in startups. So far, investors seem to be content with the Kubo experienceIn 2015, 98% of Kubo investors reinvested their earnings, and 50% added additional funds after the first six months.
Lending of all types in Mexico is trending heavily toward the online channel. Technology companies use big data and complex algorithms to assess credit worthiness, enabling them to serve customers rejected by banks. Cohete provides 1,500 online loans monthly. Customers apply, and if approved, funds are deposited directly into their bank accounts. Kueski promises payment of 30-day micro loans (around USD $200) in under two hours. Prendanet is perhaps Latin America's first online pawnshop. Mimoni and Yotepresto are still other online lenders competing in the space.
Issuers are now facing an uphill battle, however. With slowed GDP growth, currency devaluation, high debt levels and a saturated market, the number of new credit cards has decelerated from upwards of 20% prior 2013 to <10% in 2015 across the region.
in 2015, while Banamex, the second-largest issuer, saw a drop of 9% . A 2014 tax reform that established better sales tax enforcement and introduced steps to verify that expenditures are congruent with income may have inadvertently caused a cannibalization of card payments by cash. Steeped in a culture of informality, many Mexicans are keen to avoid paying taxesand cards create unwanted transparency.
A decrease in cards and an uptick in other sources of financing indicate two trends. First, for many Mexicans, a credit card's appeal lies primarily in the access it gives them to creditnot in its convenience as a payment method. Second, current rewards programs are not sufficient to inspire loyalty among some cardholders. Issuers have lacked creativity in card incentive programs, relying on tired come-ons such as airline miles and travel insurance. These incentives are wholly uninteresting to newly middle-class families whose priorities lie in upgrading household durables, for instance.
72% of the outstanding balance on Brazilian credit cards represented purchases made under a parcelado planand parcelado plans as a whole grew by 8% in 2015. By contrast, Brazil's interest-bearing card portfolio has been in decline since 2008"".
While all the trends outlined in this paper will continue to consolidate in 2017, one in particular will come to the forefront: the prominence of mobile commerce.
Yet as things stand, m-commerce is only available to Latin America's credit-card holding upper-middle class. There is still a key underserved demographic: underbanked (and uncarded) smartphone holders. This group represents a huge opportunity. They are urban, tech-savvy, connected on social media, newly middle-class, and most importantly, aspirational, meaning they want copy consumption patterns of the affluent. They are eager to use Uber, stream online content and order food for delivery on their phones, but cannot for lack of a payment method. This will begin to change as banks enable more debit cards for e-commerce, but without a cash or prepaid option, most of these potential customers remained unserved. Ambitious merchants, like Uber, who recently enabled cash payments in Mexico, are likely to pave the way on this front, but they need local payment partners truly win.