Informal urban infrastructures are a challenging environment for participatory design, both from an organizational and technical perspective. In this paper we reflect on a recent research project involving participatory sensing and design of participatory technologies for informal recycling cooperatives. We collaborated with COOPAMARE, a cooperative in central Sao Paulo, Brazil, on two goals: to map their spatial organization of waste collection, and to develop software tools for coordinating with clients and planning operations. We discuss how GPS tracking, web-based mapping, and mobile applications allow cooperatives to collect, manage, and interpret spatial data themselves, and to redesign their own system collaboratively with others. We argue for applying participatory design in international development projects, which often neglect design aspects, and discuss the social, economic and technical contexts that impact design.
As a result of ongoing urbanization, many municipalities face challenges providing basic infrastructure such as waste and recycling collection for their citizens. In many places, these services are provided by a growing informal sector [9,12]. Activities such as waste scavenging are often criminalized in modern cities; however, these policies change as informal economies become better understood. Some policy makers have shifted their focus from prosecution to inclusion, in order to improve the livelihood of those working in the informal sector, by integrating their activities into the formal system.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
We need new models that allow informal organizations to survive in a competitive, global market, without crystalizing their dynamic organization or compromising their social mission. This problem encompasses many dimensions exceeding the scope of this paper, but we believe that technology and participatory design can play an important role, by supporting and improving the operations, knowledge transfer, and communications of an informal organization. While many see waste picking as a technologically primitive industry, catadores already use mobile phones to coordinate with each other or schedule meetings with customers.
Traditionally, participatory design (PD) has been used in formal organizations, often with a clear hierarchical structure [4]. Organizations in the informal sector, with their implicit arrangements and shifting practices/power structures, therefore pose a challenge for PD. Conversely, one can argue that informal organizations also offer advantages for the application of participatory design. Judged by Clement and Van der Besselaar's criteria, many informal organizations are already highly participatory environments [2]: waste cooperatives are often owned by the workers, who are free to take individual approaches, but engage in joint decisionmaking. Consequently, organizational models for participatory and community-based waste management have been widely discussed in the recent years, but have rarely investigated technological solutions [5,8,13].
Our project, Forage Tracking (named after the microeconomic theory of optimal foraging) explored how communication technology could help a recycling cooperative operate. Together with COOPAMARE, one such coop located in central Sao Paulo, Brazil, we designed, developed, and evaluated tools for running an informal urban infrastructure.
Cooperatives are aware of these issues, as well as recent changes in the economic climate, when waste has become a lucrative domain that attracts many private companies. However, their tight financial and organizational constraints leave them no room for experimentation. They are operating at the limit of their capacity and many members are reluctant to take over new responsibilities. Although many catadores own cell-phones, they have little time for training and tasks such as data entry or documenting their daily activities.
Figure 1 - clockwise from top-left: prototype of a pickup request website; mapping workshop with cooperative workers; pickup request mobile app for residents; GPS traces of a week of collection activity, showing routes of manual pull-cart (orange) vs. truck collection (blue).
2. Once mapped, these data can help improve the visibility of the coop and the service it offers to the residents, businesses and municipality.
The catadores know many things about the city; they read and navigate the city differently from most other urban dwellers. Documenting and mapping this tacit knowledge, identifying the amounts of waste recovered from respective areas, and discovering opportunities for expansion and optimization would produce valuable information for the cooperative, strengthen their position towards the municipality, and support the internal training of new collectors.
of GPS traces and visible random errors actually help their credibility; these data are not easy to fake.
MAPPING SPATIAL ORGANIZATION The cooperative uses both a truck and hand-pulled carts to collect material. Truck activity is currently planned in a rudimentary way; only the driver has complete awareness of the locations and schedules of each customer, and keeps them in a handwritten calendar. While most members are involved in the truck stream, either loading, sorting, or baling items, a few manual collectors operate relatively independently from this work. These pickers collect and bind separately from the others, so their peers know little about their specific movements.
Following several of these interviews, we conducted a group interview with the entire cooperative. We pinned up three paper maps: the whole city of Sao Paulo (with COOPAMARE's location and known member homes marked), the full set of traces showing truck and manual collector routes, and the same traces overlaid on street map. With markers, the catadores added the locations of their homes and neighbourhoods to the city map, while one collector who didn't carry a GPS unit manually drew out her route on the detailed street map.
Our interviews revealed catadores as people who reject authority and rigid structures, and particularly sensitive to issues of privacy and control. By using offline GPS loggers rather than real-time trackers, we emphasized the active role of self-documenting, rather than the passive role of being observed. Since most decisions in the cooperative are reached through democratic vote, and opting out from individuals is accepted, pressure to participate was less of a concern. On the other hand, a few members of the cooperative said real-time tracking would be really useful for coordination in the future.
We chose to demonstrate a working system, in this case an Ushahidi2 instance with modified interfaces, to technologically inexperienced catadores in order to prove its potential. Based on their feedback, we developed a series of prototypes, such as a data management website that could interface with low-end cell phones.
A second concern was the type of participation such a system would encourage. Currently, a significant number of residents visit the cooperative to drop off material, contributing a quarter of the total volume processed and sold. The digital platform would have to be designed to encourage such drop-offs when possible, rather than individual pick-ups.
The cooperative is also a complex social system, in which many internal and external actors fulfill important roles. The cooperative has to address the different motivations of their clients: to ensure that their donated material ends up actually being recycled, to support the social mission of providing an exit from poverty and homelessness, and to maintain a clean and orderly neighbourhood. COOPAMARE relies on establishing trust in meeting these goals through personal contact.
Beyond explicating the hidden knowledge of the cooperative, participatory mapping had another important effect. By placing their movements "on the map," it conveyed a sense of identity for the cooperative, providing tangible evidence of their place in the city.
Action Research methodologies [3] embrace such shifts and may offer lessons for navigating these challenges, yet often neglect design aspects. Participatory design offers valuable tools for development in the informal sector.
We owe special gratitude to Prof. Maria Cecilia Loschiavo dos Santos (USP), Laura Fostinone, Libby Mcdonald (CoLab MIT), the members of COOPAMARE, especially Dulcinea, Chico, and Laerte.
1. Burke, J., Estrin, D., Hansen, M., et al. Participatory sensing. World Sensor Web Workshop, (2006), 1-5.
5. Kironde, J. and Yhdego, M. The governance of waste management in urban Tanzania: towards a community based approach. Resources, conservation and recycling 21, 4 (1997), 213-226.
13. Scheinberg, A., Spies, S., Simpson, M.H., and Mol, A.P.J. Assessing urban recycling in low- and middle-income countries: Building on modernised mixtures.
14. Shilton, K., Ramanathan, N., Reddy, S., et al. Participatory design of sensing networks: strengths and challenges. Proceedings of the Tenth Anniversary Conference on Participatory Design 2008, Indiana University (2008), 282-285.