Digital platforms are most successful when they demonstrate each of the three advantages identified earlier; however, each advantage is more or less important dependent on which professional niche or sector the platform targets. For instance, in the local construction sector, it might not be crucial to provide transparency on wages, because pay levels are well-known. In this case, digital platforms help primarily by improving the efficiency of matching and by more thoroughly vetting workers hired as a result of past employer reviews and references.
seekers. For instance, LinkedIn can identify actionable trends in regional labor markets, such as which fields are growing and which are waning, making it possible to recommend related and more successful fields to users in waning industries. For developing countries, trends might predict demand for specific language skills, a type of customer service, or business process outsourcing capabilities. Armed with this knowledge, job seekers can tailor their CV and invest in new skill-boosters or "nanodegrees" that will better position them in their job market.
To help bridge the skills gap, many job matching platforms are also linking up with training programs. Viridis Learning and Andela offer training and corresponding certifications that link closely to employer needs so they can facilitate better matches, which are based on verified knowledge or skills. Viridis allows students to build highly tailored career pathways, accumulate verified work experience and education credentials, and identify suitable employers and positions; meanwhile, Viridis streamlines recruiting by sourcing job seekers who have proven they possess the skills, ability, and interests required by the employer. Lagos-based Andela seeks to close the global gap between the growth in tech jobs and the shortage of people with skills to fill them by offering free world-class training in software development and business, after which the graduates are placed in top tech companies. Kazi Connect, based in Nairobi, is more than just a job platform serving informal, lower-skilled workers; it also offers workers the chance to skill up through training courses and mobile education, and offers certifications that can be uploaded onto their profiles.
In Figure 1, we use skill level as a dimension to segment digital job platforms, since workers' skill level will determine the services and offerings that platforms should offer. From the employer's perspective, for instance, a successful digital platform that sources lower-skilled, blue collar workers will need to have low transaction costs, expertise in pre-vetting job seekers for basic technical skills, and experience assessing relevant soft skills (punctuality, attitude, grit). Meanwhile, employers looking for higher-skilled or white-collar workers prioritize finding the right candidate (in terms of fit, experience, and niche talent) who will add value to and stay at the company, and can therefore justify somewhat higher transaction costs. For these employers, digital platforms will need to do less vetting (since workers will have formal education records), but can add value by being able to source qualified candidates across regions and assess a different set of soft skills (leadership, management, persuasion). On the job seeker's end, lower-skilled workers prefer the platform to be easy to use, accessible (often mobile is easier than web interface), free or affordable, and to serve as a place to build their track record. Higher-skilled workers prioritize ease and efficacy of finding suitable jobs and quality of employers and positions listed.
The authors would also like to thank Joe Dougherty, Devang Vussonji, Robin Miller and Walter Lamberson for their feedback and contributions.
2 The New York Times, "Your next ;job application could involve a video game," January 26, 2014; Corner Stone Rework, "Spotlight on recruiting tech: what worksand what doesn'twith game-based evaluation," January 30, 2014.