Ahirwal is a typical worker in India's informal sector. A school dropout, he doesn't have any vocational training either. His income is not hxed; it depends on the number of households in the pool and the tips he sometimes gets. When asked about Social Security benehts, he laughs and says, "What's that".
GDH was started with Rs. 3 million (US$50,000) from Chowdhury's nest egg and contributions from friends. Last year, the company received US$340,000 from Srini Raju, co-founder and managing director of seed capital ffrm Peepul Capital. (Raju invested in GDH in his personal capacity.) The site's model is simple  to source candidates from the bottom of the pyramid, screen and train them and, once they are selected, conduct background and health checks.
"The absence of empathy and sensitivity toward bottom-of-the-pyramid human resources is quite pervasive. We [at Gram Tarang] have succeeded in inking long-term partnerships with various industries to ensure fair and acceptable compensation, and other bene ts and career progression plans," says Mukti Mishra, chairman of Gram Tarang.
Gram Tarang was launched with an investment of US$3.4 million, half from the NSDC and the rest from funds raised by Mishra and other promoters. Though it has not been able to break even yet, Mishra hopes that by March 2014, Gram Tarang will be able to register a "decent surplus, and by April 2016 reach a turnover of US$10.3 million." The organization's future plans include venturing into several other states.
According to "Turning Available Work into Jobs," a report compiled by ISF in October 2012, there are more than 360 million people in the unorganized sector in India. "Our demography is getting younger and requires multipronged initiatives to facilitate the transition from the unorganized to the organized. We urgently need a platform that brings employers and prospective candidates closer and faster. We need to revamp our practically defunct and ineffective employment exchanges," adds Chakraborty.
Debapratim Purkayastha, an assistant professor at ICFAI Business School (IBS) Hyderabad, explains that building sustainable livelihoods is a win-win for both employers and employees. The former get well-trained workers and the latter get fair pay and the dignity of labor. Moreover, being part of a formalized employment structure increases workers' bargaining power and awareness of their rights.
It is not just training and recruitment that has caught the interest of entrepreneurs. For example, Babajob.com is a village version of LinkedIn, listing jobs for drivers, cashiers, cooks, tailors and nannies. Founded in 2007, the company has raised US$1.2 million in Series A funding. Currently the site has approximately 1.7 million jobs posted; on a monthly basis, it helps more than 150,000 job seekers and employers connect with each other. The revenues are derived from prospective employers paying the portal to get leads to candidates.
Bangalore-based Canvera has occupied a different segment of unorganized space, though perhaps not as underprivileged. The company caters to professional photographers. Dhiraj Kacker and Peeyush Rai, both Indian Institute of Technology Mumbai alumni, set up the online photography company in 2007. Canvera is currently servicing close to 14,000 photographers spread across 400 cities in India. That flgure is just a fraction of the 250,000 professional photographers in the country. Since inception, Canvera has raised US$12 million from Info Edge, Footprint Ventures and DFJ. The enterprise is yet to break even; Kacker hopes it will do so in 2014. It closed the last flscal year with revenues of US$5 million.