The Brookings Institution is a nonprofit organization devoted to independent research and policy solutions. Its mission is to conduct high-quality, independent research and, based on that research, to provide innovative, practical recommendations for policymakers and the public. The conclusions and recommendations of any Brookings publication are solely those of its author(s), and do not reflect the views of the Institution, its management, or its other scholars.
The Brookings Financial and Digital Inclusion Project (FDIP), launched in summer 2014, examines access to and usage of secure, affordable formal financial services among underserved populations. The objective of FDIP is to provide policymakers, the private sector, representatives of non-governmental organizations, and the general public with information that can help improve financial inclusion in their respective countries and beyond. As part of this aim, the FDIP team produces an annual report and scorecard evaluating commitment to and progress toward financial inclusion across a set of geographically, economically, and diverse countries.
Moving forward, we identify four priority areas where action is needed to advance inclusive finance: 1) an increased focus on establishing (and then achieving) specific, measurable financial inclusion targets; 2) promoting more comprehensive data collection and analysis regarding financial access and usage, particularly among traditionally underserved groups such as women; 3) advancing regulatory efforts designed to facilitate financial inclusion; and 4) enhancing financial capability to promote sustainable financial inclusion. Taken together, progress on these action items would amplify opportunities for underserved populations to participate in the digital economy and leverage formal financial services to improve their well-being.
extended our analysis to several new countries in addition to the 21 studied last year. For details on the 2016 FDIP metrics, consult pages 110-119.
Following publication of the 2015 FDIP Report, our team solicited feedback from a diverse array of financial inclusion experts, including private and public sector representatives and experts at non-government entities. We also participated in and hosted a number of public and private convenings to engage with other financial inclusion experts. For example, a Brookings roundtable on gender disparities in access to and usage of financial services informed our recommendations regarding "Financial Inclusion for Women." Additionally, we sought engagement with financial inclusion stakeholders by providing a dedicated comments portal regarding our work (FDIPcomments@brookings.edu).
Input from diverse financial inclusion stakeholders improved our efforts to identify additional countries for the 2016 FDIP country sample, augment and enhance the 2016 FDIP Report metrics, capture updates on progress toward greater financial inclusion across our focus countries, develop policy recommendations (e.g., regarding financial capability and the gender gap in access to and usage of formal financial services), and focus on key demographicsspecifically, women, migrants, refugees, and youththat are disproportionately affected by barriers to financial services.
of the FDIP sample by including countries in the Caribbean, Central America and North Africa. As was the case during the consultation process for the 2015 report, we benefited from high levels of engagement with in-country experts, enabling us to supplement our analysis of publicly available primary and secondary sources with perspectives from financial inclusion stakeholders with long experience in these countries.
The 2016 FDIP research continues to examine a range of traditional and non-traditional financial services relevant to individuals at the margins of, or outside, the formal financial system. As in our 2015 report, the 2016 study focuses primarily on basic, formal financial services (e.g., payments and savings) since these services typically constitute the entry point and area of greatest immediate need for individuals whose previous engagement with the formal financial sector has been limited.16 17 While we do not look extensively at informal financial services, consumer engagement in informal or "semiformal" services such as informal savings clubs is quite common among underserved populations globally: According to Global Findex data, "[a]bout 9 percent of adultsor 17 percent of saversin developing economies reported having saved [semiformally] in the past 12 months" as of 2014.18 Thus, formalizing certain financial services could provide a valuable pathway into the formal financial system for many underserved populations.
The 2016 FDIP Report shows that substantial progress has been made toward advancing financial inclusion in many countries. Kenya retained its position as the highest-ranked country in the study by a 5 percentage point margin. The other top-scoring countries include Colombia (earning 79 percent of the total possible score), and South Africa, Brazil, and Uganda (tied at 78 percent each). Kenya, South Africa, Brazil, and Uganda held their places in the top five-ranked countries between 2015 and 2016, while Colombia moved up five percentage points and therefore joined the top performers. Colombia's progress was driven in part by the development of new financial inclusion targets and its strong mobile capacity as measured by our updated FDIP mobile capacity metrics.
The biggest improvement in scores between 2015 and 2016 was made by the Philippines, which increased its overall score by eight percentage points. The increase was driven in part by the launch of its national financial inclusion strategy, as well as its strong performance in terms of mobile capacity. For example, the Philippines boasts among the highest rates of smartphone penetration across our country sample. Along with Indonesia, it was the only lower middle income country to receive a top score for its level of smartphone adoption.
[W]hile there is no single path to facilitating financial inclusion, engagement in multinational knowledge-sharing networks and investing in digital financial services can help countries develop successful and sustainable approaches to making progress toward inclusive finance.
Since June 2015, there have been several important developments in regard to country commitment. Among the key advances were the July 2015 launches of national financial inclusion strategies by the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP) in the Philippines30 and by the Comision Multisectorial de Inclusion Financiera in Peru.31 Both documents move beyond a focus on account adoption to building policy, regulatory, and supervisory strategies to ensure a robust financial ecosystem. Each strategy also includes financial education and consumer protection provisions designed to promote financial inclusion.
The top-scoring countries on mobile capacity were fairly evenly distributed across sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America, and Southeast Asia. South Africa, Indonesia, the Philippines, and Colombia all received 94 percent of the total possible score within the mobile capacity dimension, with El Salvador following closely behind at 89 percent. The top five scoring countries comprise lower middle income and upper middle income countries.
More generally, as the category implies, the mobile capacity dimension indicates the existence of opportunities for enhanced adoption of mobile money and other digital financial services that leverage mobile infrastructure. To be fully realized, this capacity must be supplemented with an enabling regulatory environment, appropriate product development, and awareness of and trust in products and services that accelerate utilization.
first bring new customers into the system and then foster competition across providers to offer products targeted to various market segments.36 While the platform is too new to fully evaluate its impact on financial inclusion, we view this approach to promoting collaboration and competition within an interoperable framework as an important model for other nations to consider in their efforts to promote inclusive finance.
In August 2015, the Reserve Bank of India gave in-principle approval to nearly a dozen entities to set up payments banks,40 following the issuance of payments banks guidelines in November 2014.41 This arrangement is expected to broaden the financial services market and enable greater competition and innovation within the sector by opening up the market to providers that are well-positioned to target underserved customers. While implementation is ongoing, we look forward to following the activities of these entities over the coming year and evaluating the impact of these payments banks on financial inclusion in India.
We firmly believe that the financial access challenges faced by women and other marginalized groups merit particular consideration, and we highlight those challenges below. In future years, we hope to have access to sufficient data to address these aspects of inclusion more fully in our country-specific evaluations.
Based on our research, we identify six action items for addressing the gender gap in financial inclusion. While many of these action items would benefit financially underserved men as well as women, women are often disproportionately affected by legal, cultural, and educational barriers to formal financial services that can be mitigated by the action items described below.
pertaining to its financial system for 14 years.53 As of February 2016, Rwanda's central bank was also working toward the development of a framework for bank reporting intended to identify product, channel, and distribution reach by sex.54 The Central Bank of Nigeria has begun collecting sex-disaggregated data,55 as has the government of Zambia.56 In the coming years, it will be important for data collection efforts such as these to be adopted in a much wider range of countries in order to identify market gaps and opportunities with respect to advancing financial services among women.
Under-resourced migrants and refugees often face particularly acute financial challenges, including not only poverty, but also a heightened set of barriers with respect to access to the local financial services infrastructure. Unsurprisingly, this can leave them reliant on informal services that can be costly, unreliable, and insecure.
Below, we identify three action items with respect to promoting financial inclusion among refugees and marginalized migrants. We recognize that the decision of when and how to implement these items will of necessity be complex and context-specific given the nature of refugee and migrant flows. Nonetheless, we believe these action items reflect important principles to consider when developing pathways toward financial inclusion for these groups.
With respect to advancing financial inclusion among young refugees and migrants, there are a few examples of initiatives to integrate children without guardians into the formal financial sector. For example, in 2014 Bangladesh Bank instituted a new policy enabling children living without guardians to open bank accounts if a nongovernmental organization signed on their behalf.91 While this policy is an important first step toward facilitating access to accounts that enable children to steward their finances more safely and efficiently, such initiatives should of course be coupled with careful oversight and financial capability training to protect consumers.
Based on our research, we identify four priority areas that warrant additional action on the part of the international financial inclusion community: 1) establishing specific, measurable financial inclusion targets; 2) collecting and analyzing data relevant to financial access and usage, particularly among underserved groups; 3) advancing regulatory changes designed to facilitate financial inclusion; and 4) enhancing financial capability among consumers.
 National financial inclusion authorities should set specific, measurable targets with respect to financial inclusion. In doing so, financial inclusion leaders should be attentive to underserved demographics, including women.
- Why it matters: For a number of key issues in financial inclusion (e.g., frequency of account usage with respect to formaland particularly digitalfinancial services and trust in financial services), publicly available data are often limited to only a few countries, are not nationally representative, and/or subscribe to varying definitions of financial inclusion that inhibit comparability across countries. The lack of consistent, multinational data constrains the ability of researchers to identify what approaches to advancing financial inclusion are working, and why.
 Banks and other financial service providers should gather and report supply- and demand-side sex-disaggregated data. Public sector financial inclusion authorities should coordinate with financial service providers to collect and harmonize data in order to identify gaps and market opportunities.
and analyze the cost barriers faced by individuals with respect to mobile phones; and 2) promote access to mobile phones and mobile financial services among women and other underserved groups by participating in international knowledge-sharing networks.
- Next steps regarding data: Organizations such as the GSMA have tracked the effect of mobile sector taxation on the cost of mobile owner-ship,105 and organizations such as InterMedia have examined user perceptions of the costs associated with mobile money.106 However, country-specific information on the total cost of mobile ownership (including handset costs, connection costs, and call, SMS, and data usage costs)107 do not appear to be publicly available. The existence of comprehensive, global data surrounding these costs would provide greater insight into barriers with respect to mobile phone adoption. This data would also enable researchers to generate recommendations for helping ensure that mobile phones (and by extension, digital financial services) are available to consumers who need them most.
Financial service providers should consider how best to leverage technology (either directly or through technology companies) to assess non-financial data that can advance access to credit among consumers who need it within the context of strong consumer protection frameworks.
- Next steps: Governments should ensure that strong financial consumer protection frameworks are coupled with regulatory provisions that enable financial service providers to explore means of leveraging the proliferation of available consumer data to facilitate access to financial services among those who need them.
- Next steps: Ensuring that private sector voices are represented in dedicated financial inclusion bodies will help facilitate coordination among public and private sector bodies with respect to developing new financial regulations or adapting existing regulations to fit emerging services. Both digital and traditional providers should be permitted to adapt know-your-customer requirements and other combating the financing of terrorism and antimoney laundering mechanisms to reflect the level of risk posed by underserved customers engaging in low-value transactions in order to scale adoption of these services among the target market.
- Why it matters: To move beyond the objective of advancing access to financial services to facilitating effective usage of those services, consumers must understand what services are available, how those services will be helpful to them in their daily lives, and how to effectively leverage the given products or services. Consumers who fully understand the scope and impact of their financial options possess a greater ability to confidently access and effectively deploy formal financial services.
The government of Afghanistan's commitment to promoting formal (and particularly digital) financial services to advance financial inclusion, as demonstrated by its membership in multinational financial inclusion knowledge-sharing networks and involvement in high-level events focusing on electronic payments, is an important ingredient in advancing opportunities for more secure and accessible financial services among underserved populations.
The forthcoming release of Bangladesh's national financial inclusion strategy and the institution of the Financial Inclusion Department should enhance coordination among key stakeholders with respect to financial inclusion. Implementation of the various activities identified by the Financial Inclusion Department, including data collection initiatives, will hopefully provide a better sense of market gaps and opportunities with respect to digital financial services.
In May 2013, a legal framework on payment arrangementsincluding mobile paymentswas created.20 In October 2013, Brazil passed a law that instituted a "category of electronic payment institutions regulated by the Central Bank" and established the principles of non-exclusion and interoperability.21 22 These principles were intended to foster competition and facilitate greater access to financial services.
The macroeconomic landscape and extent of financial and digital infrastructure in Chile are among the most developed of the FDIP countries, and Chile features fairly robust rates of formal financial account adoption.6 Chile boasts one of the highest-income economies among the FDIP focus countries7 and ranks fourth in terms of the percentage of adults age 15 and older with an account at a formal financial institution or mobile money provider (about 63 percent as of 2014).8 Chile has demonstrated clear commitment to advancing financial inclusion and strong leadership in terms of addressing the gender gap in engagement with formal financial services, as discussed below. Diversifying its mobile money ecosystem and developing specific electronic money (e-money) regulations could help Chile further expand access to financial services.
Beyond the release of the surveys detailed previously, Chile has engaged in a number of regulatory and institutional financial inclusion efforts. For example, as of May 2016, Chile's congress was considering a new legal framework granting nonbank entities access to the country's retail payment system.28 Additionally, the Technical Secretariat on Financial Inclusion has been created by the Chilean government and is expected to launch in summer 2016.29 The development of this body should help promote implementation of the country's national financial inclusion strategy.
On the regulatory side, the current legislative initiative to promote access of nonbank entities to the retail payments system is expected to facilitate the expansion of mobile money and other digital payments in the future.30 With respect to data collection and analysis, public and private sector entities in Chile should leverage the findings from national surveys surrounding household and individual financial behavior to enhance the design, marketing, and delivery of financial products for customers. Finally, diversifying mobile money offerings and developing targeted e-money regulations could augment adoption of digital financial services by enhancing regulatory clarity, promoting competition, and fostering innovation with respect to developing a breadth of services to meet consumer needs.
Regarding data collection, the SFC-BDO annual financial inclusion reports,17 BDO's quarterly financial inclusion reports,18 and the SFC-BDO financial inclusion demand study19 have helped quantify the extent of financial inclusion in Colombia. Analyses of these findings help drive the development of national financial inclusion priorities and activities.
As demonstrated by demand- and supply-side data gathered by government entities, Colombia has made significant progress in expanding access to formal financial services. Further improvements regarding product design and financial capability should help promote usage of these services among underserved populations, particularly with respect to digital financial services. The implementation of the forthcoming national financial education work plan should help advance efforts to amplify usage of formal financial services by enhancing financial knowledge and promoting healthy financial behaviors.
According to the World Bank's Global Financial Inclusion (Global Findex) database, about 54 percent of adults age 15 and older in the Dominican Republic had an account with a formal financial institution as of 2014.6 In terms of the gender distribution of accounts, about 56 percent of women in the Dominican Republic held accounts with a formal financial institution, compared with about 52 percent of men.7 These statistics place the Dominican Republic as the only new 2016 FDIP country in the Latin America & Caribbean (LAC) region in which women either exceeded or equaled men in terms of the percentage of individuals who held accounts with a formal financial institution. Moreover, the Dominican Republic was one of only a handful of the 2016 FDIP focus countries to receive that distinction. While the Dominican Republic has demonstrated significant momentum toward greater financial inclusion in recent years, enhancing regulatory clarity regarding electronic money and establishing explicit national financial inclusion priorities through the institution of a national financial inclusion strategy could help accelerate the emergence and adoption of branchless banking services.
One reason for the disparity may be that some women in Egypt must receive permission to spend money.25 Also, significantly more women surveyed in Egypt considered ID requirements for owning a mobile phone or using mobile services to be a barrier than did men (44 percent versus 26 percent, respectively).26 A recent initiative (discussed below) may help advance access to these identification documents for underserved groups such as women.
Another recent initiative is the implementation of a national financial inclusion survey intended to inform a national financial inclusion strategy: As of September 2015, the CBE was conducting a field survey to identify barriers to financial inclusion.38 Moving forward, Egypt's forthcoming national financial inclusion survey findings should contribute to a better understanding of financial inclusion pathways and barriers. Egypt also has a Financial Literacy National Committee within the CBE that includes regulators, academic institutions, banks, and other financial institutions that conduct financial education awareness and training.39 The findings of this committee could contribute to a more holistic understanding of the issues raised in the forthcoming national financial inclusion survey results.
providers, reduce certain access barriers for customers, and enhance the utility of formal financial services for customers.
Finally, implementation of the new national financial inclusion strategy and efforts to strengthen mobile capacity, including 3G network coverage and mobile phone penetration, are also needed to help drive greater financial inclusion.
Widespread poverty, exacerbated by a devastating earthquake in 2010,6 and a history of political instability have complicated Haiti's financial inclusion landscape.7 As of 2014, Haiti had the lowest GDP per capita (in USD) of any of the 2016 FDIP countries in the Latin America & Caribbean (LAC) region and was within the bottom six FDIP countries overall in terms of GDP per capita (in USD).8 A 2015 GSMA report noted that Haiti tied with Nicaragua for the highest rate of "unbanked" adults in the LAC region.9 However, the recent development of a national financial inclusion strategy should crystallize Haiti's approach to advancing access to and usage of quality financial services. Moreover, mobile financial services have offered opportunities for facilitating greater engagement with formal financial services in Haiti, which could enable pathways for underserved individuals to leverage their resources more efficiently and safely to improve their families' welfare.
India has accelerated its efforts to promote financial inclusion through implementation of the historic Prad-han Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana (PMJDY) program, launched in 2014.6 The program has demonstrated considerable impact with respect to expanding financial access, although dormancy rates indicate that efforts to promote financial capability and enhance the utility of financial products and services are still needed.7 Government efforts to advance shared public infrastructure have contributed to the success of the PMJDY program.
Other assessments have found less widespread account penetrationfor example, an InterMedia survey of adults age 15 and older conducted from June to October 2015 found that 63 percent of adults had a "full-service" account13 at a bank.14 While the exact account adoption figures vary, the PMJDY program has certainly helped drive access to formal financial services across India and amplify the discourse surrounding financial inclusion among public and private sector stakeholders.
Over the coming months, payments banks must surmount logistical challenges involving the setup of subsidiaries and hiring staff, as well as determining a viable business model, in order to expand access to financial products and services among marginalized commu-nities.66 Mobile-enabled payments bank accounts are expected to be included in the UPI, which should facilitate account interoperability.
specific use cases to prospective customers.71 72 Additionally, accelerating interoperability of electronic wallets could advance usage of these services by promoting convenience for customers.
Indonesia's government has clearly expressed its commitment to promoting the adoption of digital financial services, and the country's strong mobile capacity levels are conducive to this effort: As of 2014, Indonesia was the fourth largest mobile market in the world6 and held the distinction of being among the first countries to achieve mobile money platform interoperability.7 However, opportunities for improving the regulatory environment for digital financial services remain, particularly in terms of harmonizing regulations regarding branchless banking and electronic money (e-money) and ensuring an even playing field for financial service providers.
Harmonizing and/or consolidating the regulations between BI and OJK could render the regulatory environment less challenging for new and prospective financial service providers to navigate and less restrictive for providers and consumers.45 Specifically, policymakers should consider amending the e-money regulations to enable MNOs to partner with individual entities that are not considered formally registered. Modifying the branchless banking regulations to open up opportunities for agent interoperability could also drive the expansion of branches into underserved communities.
In terms of formal financial account adoption rates, Malawi was among the five lowest-scoring 2016 FDIP countries. While digital financial services provide opportunities for individuals to engage with formal financial services in a country that has low penetration of physical banking infrastructure, limited mobile capacity levels and a lack of interoperability have constrained adoption of digital financial services to date.
On the regulatory side, finalizing the draft e-money regulations in order to formalize tiered KYC processes and enhance regulatory clarity could also reduce last-mile barriers and encourage the entry of diverse financial service providers into the digital finance market.
In terms of national commitments to financial inclusion, according to the latest Maya Declaration Progress Report, a draft of Mexico's objectives and targets relating to financial inclusion has been developed and is being evaluated by the members of CONAIF.36 The drafting of a new financial inclusion strategy is underway and is expected to be published in summer 2016.37 The dissemination of this strategy will help provide a roadmap to advancing financial inclusion and help promote coordination among key stakeholders.
However, in April 2015 the CBN issued a licensing framework for "super-agents" that banks and other regulated financial service providers can leverage to extend access to financial services among underserved groups.20 Companies that are approved as super-agents are permitted to monitor and supervise the activities of agents, among other measures.21 This framework enabled MNOs to operate as super-agents for banks.
The SBP has also enhanced the regulatory framework for consumer protection, with the Banking Conduct & Consumer Protection Department issuing a number of regulations and guidelines to protect consumers, including Guidelines of Business Conduct for Banks (CPD Circular No. 2 of 2015)36 and Guiding Principles on Fairness of Service Charges (CPD Circular No. 1 of 2015).37 Finally, to promote financial literacy, a "Child and Youth Financial Literacy Program" has been initiated under the auspices of Pakistan's National Financial Literacy Program.
While the development of an interoperable electronic platform is a tremendous step forward with respect to digital capacity, further enhancements in mobile capacity (including mobile subscribership and 3G network coverage) would complement the BIM initiative in promoting digital financial services. Additionally, implementing the financial education components of the national financial inclusion strategy should help facilitate greater awareness of and engagement with digital financial services.
In July 2015, the BSP launched a national financial inclusion strategy.26 That same month, the World Bank published a report detailing takeaways from a survey on financial capability and inclusion in the Philippines, conducted between February and September 2014. Among other findings, the survey noted that of the 20 million Filipino adults who reported saving money, only 10 million had bank accounts. 27 28 Therefore, there are considerable untapped opportunities to introduce formal financial savings to many consumers.
With respect to the regulatory environment for financial services, in January 2016, the BSP expanded the scope of permitted activities (specifically, full account opening) in micro-banking offices to facilitate greater access to financial services among underserved populations.37 In February 2016, the BSP lifted a 1999 moratorium on the approval of licenses for new financial institutions, which will be implemented over a two-year transition period. Incentives and exemptions to certain fees and other restrictions will be provided to entities that intend to open establishments in underserved areas.38 This initiative should help augment the Philippines' supply-side financial services landscape.
As of 2015, South Africa was considering a draft national-level financial inclusion policy, a possible financial inclusion forum, and a national financial inclusion strategy.20 These targeted financial inclusion initiatives are expected to build upon the financial access themes established in the policy documents described above.
In terms of country commitment, the government of South Africa should move forward with the finalization and adoption of its draft financial inclusion strategy and ensure effective implementation of the strategy through the designation of dedicated financial inclusion champions.
A 2016 GSMA report highlighted a number of challenges with respect to mobile-related costs in Tanzania.38 The report pointed out that mobile is one of the most heavily taxed sectors in Tanzania, accounting for more than a third of the cost of mobile ownership. Thus, regulators and industry leaders should consider the issue of taxation on mobile handsets and services in light of promoting access to digital financial mechanisms.39 On the demand-side, implementation of the relevant provisions of the National Financial Education Framework should contribute to enhanced financial capability among consumers in the medium- to long-term.
The passage of Turkey's Law on Payment and Securities Settlement Systems, Payment Services and Electronic Money Institutions in 20136 and associated Regulation on Payment Services, Electronic Money Issuance, Payment Institutions, and Electronic Money Institutions in 2014 reflect the government's recognition of the value of digital financial services.7 However, opportunities for improvement remain with respect to fully implementing regulations surrounding electronic money (e-money), expanding Turkey's financial infrastructure into rural and otherwise underserved areas, and operationalizing Turkey's financial inclusion commitments.
Policymakers and regulators should consider developing and implementing agent banking legislation that would enable banks to formally contract diverse entities as agents in order to further expand the distribution network for financial services. At the macroeconomic level, Turkey should monitor growth in loan usage and credit card usage, particularly given fairly low formal savings rates, in order to mitigate the risk of over-in-debtedness.33 Finally, over the coming year, we will follow developments in Turkey's financial landscape regarding approval of licenses for e-money institutions and monitor its response to the unique needs of refugee and migrant populations within the country.
Awareness of mobile money is considerably lower in Vietnam than in other Asian countries such as Bangladesh and Indonesia, with only 19 percent of surveyed consumers in Vietnam aware of mobile money, compared with 35 percent in Indonesia and about 100 percent in Bangladesh.31 Amplifying and targeting advertising of mobile money services toward prospective users and extending financial capability efforts could help increase awareness and adoption rates.
Recent, publicly available data on adoption of financial services, particularly among the financially underserved, are limited in Vietnam, and no national survey of financial capability appears to have been conducted by Vietnam's government to date.43 A 2014 International Finance Corporation (IFC) report noted that Visa had recently supported a survey on financial capability in 27 countries in which Vietnam ranked 25th on a series of questions pertaining to financial knowledge, perceptions, and behaviors among women.44 Thus, there is clearly space for enhanced financial education and capability initiatives in Vietnam, and a national financial inclusion strategy could help facilitate collaborative efforts toward achieving this objective.
With respect to underserved populations in particular, public and private sector representatives should work together to enhance awareness of digital financial services among underserved populations, particularly those in rural areas.38 Additionally, policymakers and financial service providers should leverage the latest FinScope findings and other data to design and deliver products that meet the needs of women in order to reduce the financial inclusion gender gap.
In addition to coordinating with in-country financial inclusion authorities, we engaged with a diverse array of financial sector and development experts based in the United States through in-person meetings, calls, and participation in private and public events in order to solicit their perspectives on global trends, challenges, and opportunities with respect to financial inclusion.
In addition to communications with in-country experts, the FDIP team expanded its engagement strategy for the second year of the project by hosting two roundtables at Brookings and participating in a broad array of international and domestic financial inclusion events. The Brookings roundtables, held in October 2015 and March 2016, provided an opportunity to explore key themes regarding the global financial inclusion landscape, including anti-money laundering/combating the financing of terrorism efforts, digital identity initiatives, and the gender gap in financial inclusion. These discussions, as well as the FDIP team's participation in private meetings, invite-only roundtables, and public events among diverse financial inclusion entities, informed and enhanced the research process for the 2016 FDIP Report.
- Sources: Information for this indicator was primarily derived from surveys of the Alliance for Financial Inclusion's "2015 Maya Declaration Progress Report: Commitments into Action;" the Alliance for Financial Inclusion Financial Inclusion Strategy Peer Learning Group's "A Timeline of Achievement" and "National Financial Inclusion Strategies: Current State of Practice" documents; the Economist Intelligence Unit's "Global Microscope 2015: The Enabling Environment for Financial Inclusion;" evaluations of online content available from governmental and INGO websites; and information provided by government officials within select FDIP countries.
specifically focuses on numerical targets. For the purposes of this study, macroeconomic goals, such as an increase in the percentage of savings as GDP, and goals related solely to microfinance (in the narrow sense of microloans) were not included in our evaluation of quantifiable financial inclusion goals.
- Sources: The predominant sources consulted for this indicator include the Alliance for Financial Inclusion's "2015 Maya Declaration Progress Report: Commitments into Action" and the Economist Intelligence Unit's "Global Microscope 2015: The Enabling Environment for Financial Inclusion." Other supplementary sources include surveys of governmental authorities' and INGO's websites, as well as correspondence with government representatives in various FDIP focus countries.
- Sources: The primary source consulted for this indicator was the World Bank's "Financial Inclusion Strategies Database," which features more than 50 countries that have either "made formal commitments under the Alliance for Financial Inclusion's Maya Declaration or have been identified by the Financial Inclusion Strategy Peer Learning Group as having significant national strategies."11 Supplementary sources include searches of governmental websites, a review of the Alliance for Financial Inclusion's "2015 Maya Declaration Progress Report: Commitments into Action," and correspondence with government representatives.
- Scoring: 1=No; 2=A specialized financial consumer protection framework is in development or finalized but not yet fully implemented OR certain financial consumer protection provisions are in place; 3=A financial consumer protection framework is in effect.
- Sources: Sources used to score this indicator include the Economist Intelligence Unit's "Global Microscope 2015: The Enabling Environment for Financial Inclusion," surveys of country-specific legislation, news reports, INGO publications, and correspondence with in-country experts.
- Scoring: 1=No e-money regulations are in place or appear to be in development; 2=E-money regulations are in development; 3=E-money regulations have been issued.
- Scoring: 1=No requirements concerning the capacity for platform interoperability have been issued by the regulator, and there is no evidence of interoperability; 2=Platforms are explicitly required to have the capacity for interoperability OR efforts to develop an interoperable platform have been advanced significantly; 3=Two or more mobile money platforms are actively interoperable.
The table below indicates the percentage point difference in countries' percentage scores between 2015 and 2016. Thus, the five new FDIP countries featured in the 2016 report are not included in the table.
11. "Opening Remarks by Secretary Jacob J. Lew at the 2015 Financial Inclusion Forum," U.S. Department of the Treasury, 1 December 2015, https://www.treasury.gov/press-center/press-releases/Pages/jl0288.aspx.
14. Jordana Barton, Emily Ryder Perlmeter, Elizabeth Sobel Blum, and Raquel R. Marquez, "Las Colonias in the 21st Century: Progress along the Texas-Mexico Border," Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, April 2015, https://www.dallasfed.org/assets/ documents/cd/pubs/lascolonias.pdf.
16. Sandeep Dave, Ashwin Shirvaikar, and Greg Baxter, "Digital Money: A Pathway to An Experience Economy," Citi and Imperial College London, January 2015, 13, http://www.citibank.com/icg/ sa/digital_symposium/digital_money_index/pdf/Digital%20 money%20A%20pathway%20to%20an%20Experience%20 Economy.pdf.
18. Asli Demirguc-Kunt, Leora Klapper, Dorothe Singer, and Peter Van Oudheusden, "The Global Findex Database 2014: Measuring Financial Inclusion around the World," Policy Research Working Paper 7255, The World Bank, April 2015, 7, http://www-wds. worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/ IB/2015/10/19/090224b08315413c/2_0/Rendered/PDF/ The0Global0Fin0ion0around0the0world.pdf#page=3.
24. Chris Bold, "New Bill, Big Changes in Digital Financial Services in Uganda," CGAP, 10 March 2016, http://www.cgap.org/blog/new-bill-big-changes-digital-financial-services-uganda.
28. Mireya Almazan and Jennifer Frydrych, "Mobile financial services in Latin America & the Caribbean: State of play, commercial models, and regulatory approaches," GSMA, May 2015, 12, http://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/wp-content/ uploads/2015/09/2015_GSMA_Mobile-financial-services-in-Latin-America-the-Caribbean.pdf.
32. "2015 Maya Declaration Progress Report: Commitments into Action," Alliance for Financial Inclusion, December 2015, 18-19, http://www.afi-global.org/sites/default/files/publications/2015_ maya_report_rev.1_low_res.pdf.
36. Naki B. Mendoza, "Competitive collaboration behind new mobile banking model in Peru," Devex Impact, 27 January 2016, https:// www.devex.com/news/competitive-collaboration-behind-new-mobile-banking-model-in-peru-87665.
40. Madhura Karnik, "Everything you need to know about India's brand new payment banks," Quartz, 20 August 2015, http:// qz.com/483059/everything-you-need-to-know-about-indias-brand-new-payments-banks/.
48. For example, a 2016 report published by the Alliance for Financial Inclusion examined 12 national financial inclusion strategies and found that only four strategies (including FDIP countries Malawi and Rwanda) had explicit quantitative targets related to women's financial inclusion. See "Policy Frameworks to Support Women's Financial Inclusion," Alliance for Financial Inclusion and Women's World Banking, March 2016, 13, http:// www.afi-global.org/sites/default/files/publications/2016-02-womenfi.1_0.pdf.
50. Inez Murray, "Catalyzing Women's Financial Inclusion: The Role of Data," CGAP, 17 February 2016, http://www.cgap.org/blog/ catalyzing-women%E2%80%99s-financial-inclusion-role-data; "The Opportunity," Global Banking Alliance for Women, 2016, http://www.gbaforwomen.org/the-opportunity/#business-opportunity.
52. Jane Lucia Duasing, "Bridging the gap: Lessons to promote financial inclusion for women," 7 March 2016, Alliance for Financial Inclusion, https://blogs.afi-global.org/2016/03/07/ bridging-the-gap-lessons-to-promote-financial-inclusion-for-women/.
54. Inez Murray, "Catalyzing Women's Financial Inclusion: The Role of Data," CGAP, 17 February 2016, http://www.cgap.org/blog/ catalyzing-women%E2%80%99s-financial-inclusion-role-data.
56. "The Value of Sex-Disaggregated Data," The Global Banking Alliance for Women, Inter-American Development Bank, and Data2X, 2015, 16, http://www.gbaforwomen.org/download/ draft-report-measuring-womens-financial-inclusion/.
60. Leora Klapper and Dorothe Singer, "The Opportunities of Digitizing Payments: How digitization of payments, transfers, and remittances contributes to the G20 goals of broad-based economic growth, financial inclusion, and women's economic empowerment," Report by the World Bank Development Research Group, the Better Than Cash Alliance, and the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation to the G20 Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion, 28 August 2014, 1, http://'www.gpfi.org/sites/ default/files/documents/FINAL_The%20Opportunities%20 of%20Digitizing%20Payments.pdf.
65. Maimbolwa Mulikelela and Natasha Kana, "Zambia: Narrow Financial Inclusion Gender Gap - BoZ," Times of Zambia via AllAfrica, 2 February 2016, http://allafrica.com/stories/ 201602030105.html.
68. "Policy Frameworks to Support Women's Financial Inclusion," Alliance for Financial Inclusion and Women's World Banking, March 2016, 8, http://www.afi-global.org/sites/default/files/ publications/2016-02-womenfi.1_0.pdf.
70. Ann Cairns and Mary Ellen Iskenderian, "The Right to Identity," Council on Foreign Relations, 11 December 2015, http://blogs.cfr. org/women-around-the-world/2015/12/11/the-right-to-identity/.
72. Leora Klapper and Dorothe Singer, "The Opportunities of Digitizing Payments: How digitization of payments, transfers, and remittances contributes to the G20 goals of broad-based economic growth, financial inclusion, and women's economic empowerment," Report by the World Bank Development Research Group, the Better Than Cash Alliance, and the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation to the G20 Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion, 28 August 2014, http://www.gpfi.org/sites/ default/files/documents/FINAL_The%20Opportunities%20 of%20Digitizing%20Payments.pdf.
74. Leora Klapper and Dorothe Singer, "The Opportunities of Digitizing Payments: How digitization of payments, transfers, and remittances contributes to the G20 goals of broad-based economic growth, financial inclusion, and women's economic empowerment," Report by the World Bank Development Research Group, the Better Than Cash Alliance, and the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation to the G20 Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion, 28 August 2014, 14, http://www.gpfi.org/ sites/default/files/documents/FINAL_The%20Opportunities %20of%20Digitizing%20Payments.pdf.
78. "Responses to the refugee crisis: Financial education and the long-term integration of refugees and migrants," OECD, February 2016, 3, https://www.oecd.org/daf/fin/financial-education/Financial-education-long-term-integration-refugees-migrants.pdf.
80. "Worldwide displacement hits all-time high as war and persecution increase," UNHCR, 18 June 2015, 2, http://www. unhcr.org/558193896.html.
90. Aakanksha Thakur, Samveet Sahoo, Prabir Barooah, Isvary Sivalingam and Grace Njoroge, "Agency Banking: How Female Agents Make a Difference," MicroSave, April 2016, http://blog. microsave.net/agency-banking-how-female-agents-make-a-difference/.
94. Mariana Dahan and Lucia Hanmer, "THE IDENTIFICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT (ID4D) AGENDA: Its Potential for Empowering Women and Girls," World Bank, 2015, 6, http://www-wds. worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/ IB/2015/09/18/090224b0830e93d8/1_0/Rendered/PDF/ The0identiflca0s000background0paper.pdf.
96. "The Value of Sex-Disaggregated Data," The Global Banking Alliance for Women, Inter-American Development Bank, and Data2X, 2015, 29, http://www.gbaforwomen.org/download/ draft-report-measuring-womens-flnancial-inclusion/.
100. "Press Release No. 15/455: IMF Releases 2015 Financial Access Survey Data," International Monetary Fund, 1 October 2015, https://www.imf.org/external/np/sec/pr/2015/pr15455.htm.
102. Shireen Santosham and Dominica Lindsey, "Connected Women 2015: Bridging the gender gap: Mobile access and usage in low- and middle-income countries," GSMA, 2016, 9, http://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/wp-content/ uploads/2016/02/GSM0001_03232015_GSMAReport_ NEWGRAYS-Web.pdf.
104. Shireen Santosham and Dominica Lindsey, "Connected Women 2015: Bridging the gender gap: Mobile access and usage in low- and middle-income countries," GSMA, 2016, 37, http://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/wp-content/ uploads/2016/02/GSM0001_03232015_GSMAReport_ NEWGRAYS-Web.pdf.
108. "GSMA and Mobile Operators Launch Initiative to Extend Mobile Money and Mobile Internet to Women Globally," GSMA, 22 February 2016, http://www.gsma.com/newsroom/press-release/ gsma-and-mobile-operators-launch-initiative-to-extend-mobile-money/.
110. For a detailed catalogue of recommendations regarding regulations for improving financial inclusion, see "Financial Regulations for Improving Financial Inclusion" (2016), published by the Center for Global Development Task Force on Regulatory Standards for Financial Inclusion, available at http://www.cgdev. org/publication/flnancial-regulations-improving-flnancial-inclusion.
112. "Global Financial Development Report 2014: Financial Inclusion," The World Bank, 2014, 11-12, http:// siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTGLOBALFINREPORT/ Resources/8816096-1361888425203/9062080-1364927957721/ GFDR-2014_Complete_Report.pdf.
114. Valeria Perotti, Siegfried Zottel, Giuseppe Iarossi, and Adedayo BolaMi-Adio, "Making Sense of Financial Capability Surveys around the World: A Review of Existing Financial Capability and Literacy Measurement Instruments," The World Bank, 2013, 7, http://responsibleflnance.worldbank.org/~/media/GIAWB/FL/ Documents/Misc/Financial-Capability-Review.pdf.
See "Responsible Finance: Financial Capability and Consumer Protection," The World Bank, 2016, http://responsibleflnance. worldbank.org/surveys/users-of-flnancial-services; and "Responsible Finance: Financial Capability and Consumer Protection: Current Projects," The World Bank, 2016, http://responsibleflnance.worldbank.org/surveys/users-of-flnancial-services.
2 Adult population figures for 2015 were calculated using data from the World Bank's World Development Indicators database, available at http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators.
1 See the World Bank's World Development Indicators data for GDP at market prices (current USD) as of 2014, available at http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators.
3 See the GSMA's GSMA Intelligence database, available (with subscription) at https://gsmaintelligence.com. Figures reflect Q1 2016 GSMA Intelligence data. See the methodology section of this report for the GSMA's definition of unique mobile subscribership.
7 Nathaniel Kretchun, "Mobile Money in Bangladesh: Still a Long Way to Go," CGAP, 9 July 2015, http://www.cgap.org/blog/ mobile-money-bangladesh-still-long-way-go.
19 David Bergman, "Bangladesh bank governor resigns after $81m hack," Al Jazeera, 15 March 2016, http://www.aljazeera. com/news/2016/03/bangladesh-bank-governor-resigns-81m-hack-160315084217775.html.
22 "7th Five Year Plan FY 2016-FY2020: Accelerating Growth, Empowering Citizens," General Economics Division, Planning Commission, Government of the People's Republic of Bangladesh, 2015, http://www.plancomm.gov.bd/wp-content/ uploads/2015/10/7th_FYP_18_02_2016.pdf.
32 "Bangladesh: Steps Toward Financial Inclusion 2014 (Wave 2)," Financial Inclusion Insights, InterMedia, 2014, 6, http://finclusion. org/uploads/file/reports/InterMedia-FII-Wave-2-Bangladesh-Wave-Report.pdf.
38 "Financial Inclusion Literacy for Strengthening Entrepreneurial Capacity: Speech of the Governor, Bangladesh Bank," Bangladesh Bank, 3 February 2016, https://www.bb.org.bd/ governor/speech/feb032016gse743.pdf.
42 Leesa Shrader, "Digital Finance in Bangladesh: Where are all the Women?," CGAP, 3 February 2015, http://www.cgap.org/blog/ digital-finance-bangladesh-where-are-all-women.
44 "Smartphones for instalments of TK 30, says state minister Tarana Halim," BDNews24.com, 11 February 2016, http:// bdnews24.com/bangladesh/2016/02/11/smartphones-for-instalments-of-tk-30-says-state-minister-tarana-halim.
46 "Bangladesh: Quicksights Report FII Tracker Survey Wave 1," Financial Inclusion Insights, InterMedia, April 2014, http:// finclusion.org/uploads/file/reports/FII-Bangladesh-Wave-One-Survey-QuickSights-Report.pdf.
1 See the World Bank's World Development Indicators data for GDP at market prices (current USD) as of 2014, available at http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators.
3 See the GSMA's GSMA Intelligence database, available (with subscription) at https://gsmaintelligence.com. Figures reflect Q1 2016 GSMA Intelligence data. See the methodology section of this report for the GSMA's definition of unique mobile subscribership.
15 Marcio I. Nakane and Bruno de Paula Rocha, "Policy Innovations to Improve Access to Financial Services: The Case of Brazil," Center for Global Development, Updated February 2012, 11, http://www.cgdev.org/doc/LRS_case_studies/Nakane_ PaulaRocha_Brazil_r1.pdf.
21 "Global Microscope 2014: The enabling environment for financial inclusion," The Economist Intelligence Unit, Sponsored by MIF/ IDB, CAF, ACCION, and Citi, 2014, 43, http://www.eiu.com/ public/topical_report.aspx?campaignid=microscope2014.
31 "Global Microscope 2014: The Enabling Environment for Financial Inclusion," Economist Intelligence Unit, Sponsored by MIF/IDB, CAF, ACCION and Citi, 2014, 65, http://www.eiu.com/public/ topical_report.aspx?campaignid=microscope2014.
1 See the World Bank's World Development Indicators data for GDP at market prices (current USD) as of 2014, available at http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators.
3 See the GSMA's GSMA Intelligence database, available (with subscription) at https://gsmaintelligence.com. Figures reflect Q1 2016 GSMA Intelligence data. See the methodology section of this report for the GSMA's definition of unique mobile subscribership.
13 "Financial Inclusion Strategy in Chile," Gobierno de Chile/ Ministerio de Desarrollo Social, 2012, 15, http://www.ipc-undp. org/conference/south-south-learning-event/presentations/ Benjamin%20Almarza.pdf.
15 J.P. Palacios, "Gobierno anuncia creacion del Consejo Nacional de Inclusion Financiera," 7 March 2014, http://www.latercera. com/noticia/negocios/2014/03/655-568469-9-gobierno-anuncia-creacion-del-consejo-nacional-de-inclusion-financiera. shtml.
17 "Encuesta Financiera de Hogares 2014," Banco Central de Chile, 2015, http://www.bcentral.cl/es/DownloadBinaryServlet? nodeId = %2FUCM%2FBCCH_ENCUESTA_140281_ES& propertyId=%2FUCM%2FBCCH_ENCUESTA_140281_ ES%2Fprimary&fileName=Presentacion_EFH_2014.pdf.
25 "Measurable Goals with Optimal Impact: 2014 Maya Declaration Progress Report," Alliance for Financial Inclusion, 2014, 21, http://www.afi-global.org/sites/default/files/publications/2014_ maya_declaration_progress_report_final_low_res.pdf.
29 Email correspondence with a representative of the Superintendencia de Bancos e Instituciones Financieras on April 26, 2016.
2 Adult population figures for 2015 were calculated using data from the World Bank's World Development Indicators database, available at http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators.
8 Beatriz Marulanda, Mariana Paredes, Caitlin Sanford, and Xavier Faz, "Country Diagnostic: Colombia," Bankable Frontier Associates and the Better Than Cash Alliance, January 2015, iv, https://www.betterthancash.org/tools-research/case-studies/ country-diagnostic-colombia.
13 "Keynote Speech at the Presentation of Colombia's National Strategy for Financial Inclusion," Speech by H.M. Queen Maxima of the Netherlands, UNSGSA, in Bogota, Colombia, 5 March 2014, http://www.unsgsa.org/files/6513/9464/4800/Keynote_ Speech_at_the_Presentation_of_Colombias_National_ Strategy_for_Financial_Inclusion_.pdf.
22 Santiago Fernandez de Lis, Maria Claudia Llanes, Carlos Lopez-Moctezuma, Juan Carlos Rojas, and David Tuesta, "Financial Inclusion and the role of mobile banking in Colombia: developments and potential," Working Paper No. 14/04, BBVA, February 2014, 14, https://www.bbvaresearch.com/wp-content/ uploads/migrados/WP_1404_tcm348-420839.pdf.
30 "Boletin Trimestral De Las Tic," Ministerio de Tecnologias de la Informacion y las Comunicaciones, November 2015, 16, http:// colombiatic.mintic.gov.co/602/articles-14228_archivo_pdf.pdf.
1 See the World Bank's World Development Indicators data for GDP at market prices (current USD) as of 2014, available at http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators.
3 See the GSMA's GSMA Intelligence database, available (with subscription) at https://gsmaintelligence.com. Figures reflect Q1 2016 GSMA Intelligence data. See the methodology section of this report for the GSMA's definition of unique mobile subscribership.
15 Rebecca Ruf, "How 3 banks in emerging economies are banking women," The World Bank, 19 November 2015, http://blogs. worldbank.org/psd/how-3-banks-emerging-economies-are-banking-women.
30 "Dominican Republic's SB, Kenya's SASRA push AFI membership to 99 overall," Alliance for Financial Inclusion, 19 March 2013, http://www.afi-global.org/news/2013/3/19/dominican-republics-sb-kenyas-sasra-push-afi-membership-99-overall.
32 "Global Microscope 2015: The Enabling Environment for Financial Inclusion," Economist Intelligence Unit, December 2015, 72, http://www.eiu.com/public/topical_report. aspx?campaignid=MicroscopeDec2015.
34 Email correspondence with representatives of the Banco Central de la Republica Dominicana on June 6, 2016.
37 Email correspondence with representatives of the Banco Central de la Republica Dominicana on June 6, 2016.
39 "Global Microscope 2015: The Enabling Environment for Financial Inclusion," Economist Intelligence Unit, December 2015, 73, http://www.eiu.com/public/topical_report. aspx?campaignid=MicroscopeDec2015.
41 "Global Microscope 2015: The Enabling Environment for Financial Inclusion," Economist Intelligence Unit, December 2015, 73, http://www.eiu.com/public/topical_report. aspx?campaignid=MicroscopeDec2015.
43 Figures provided in email correspondence with representatives of the Banco Central de la Republica Dominicana on June 6, 2016.
45 Information provided in email correspondence with representatives of the Banco Central de la Republica Dominicana on June 6, 2016. Also see http://www.sib.gob.do/prousuario/ phponline/client.php.
1 See the World Bank's World Development Indicators data for GDP at market prices (current USD) as of 2014, available at http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators.
3 See the GSMA's GSMA Intelligence database, available (with subscription) at https://gsmaintelligence.com. Figures reflect Q1 2016 GSMA Intelligence data. See the methodology section of this report for the GSMA's definition of unique mobile subscribership.
21 Shireen Santosham and Dominica Lindsey, "Bridging the gender gap: Mobile access and usage in low and middle-income countries," GSMA Connected Women, 2015, 53, http://www. gsma.com/connectedwomen/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/ GSM0001_02252015_GSMAReport_FINAL-WEB-spreads.pdf.
23 Shireen Santosham and Dominica Lindsey, "Bridging the gender gap: Mobile access and usage in low and middle-income countries," GSMA Connected Women, 2015, 26, http://www. gsma.com/connectedwomen/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/ GSM0001_02252015_GSMAReport_FINAL-WEB-spreads.pdf.
25 Shireen Santosham and Dominica Lindsey, "Bridging the gender gap: Mobile access and usage in low and middle-income countries," GSMA Connected Women, 2015, 46, http://www. gsma.com/connectedwomen/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/ GSM0001_02252015_GSMAReport_FINAL-WEB-spreads.pdf.
30 "Regulations Governing Provision of Payment Orders through Mobile Phones," [Unofficial translation], Central Bank of Egypt, Undated, http://www.cbe.org.eg/en/PaymentSystems/ RegulationsDL/MobilePayments.pdf.
39 Mona el Baradei, "Financial Literacy for Financial Inclusion, Egypt Case," Central Bank of Egypt, 2014, http://www.slideshare. net/ChildFinance/financial-inclusion-mona-el-baradei-united-nations-23-may-2014.
1 See the World Bank's World Development Indicators data for GDP at market prices (current USD) as of 2014, available at http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators.
3 See the GSMA's GSMA Intelligence database, available (with subscription) at https://gsmaintelligence.com. Figures reflect Q1 2016 GSMA Intelligence data. See the methodology section of this report for the GSMA's definition of unique mobile subscribership.
7 "Global Microscope 2015: The Enabling Environment for Financial Inclusion," Economist Intelligence Unit, December 2015, 76, http://www.eiu.com/public/topical_report. aspx?campaignid=MicroscopeDec2015.
9 Mireya Almazan and Jennifer Frydrych, "Mobile financial services in Latin America & the Caribbean: State of play, commercial models, and regulatory approaches," GSMA, May 2015, 12, http://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/wp-content/ uploads/2015/09/2015_GSMA_Mobile-financial-services-in-Latin-America-the-Caribbean.pdf.
24 "Expanding Access to Financial Services through New Technological Channels in El Salvador," The World Bank, 21 October 2014, http://www.worldbank.org/en/ results/2014/10/21/xpanding-access-to-financial-services-through-new-technological-channels-in-el-salvador.
42 "Global Microscope 2015: The Enabling Environment for Financial Inclusion," Economist Intelligence Unit, December 2015, 77, http://www.eiu.com/public/topical_report. aspx?campaignid=MicroscopeDec2015.
44 Email correspondence with a representative of the Banco Central de Reserva de El Salvador on April 22, 2016.
46 "Expanding Access to Financial Services through New Technological Channels in El Salvador," The World Bank, 21 October 2014, http://'www.worldbank.org/en/ results/2014/10/21/xpanding-access-to-financial-services-through-new-technological-channels-in-el-salvador.
48 "El Salvador Congress approves 'Legislative Decree 72' facilitating financial inclusion efforts throughout the country," Alliance for Financial Inclusion, 30 September 2015, http://www. afi-global.org/news/2015/9/30/el-salvador-congress-approves-legislative-decree-72-facilitating-financial-inclusion.
50 "Expanding Access to Financial Services through New Technological Channels in El Salvador," The World Bank, 21 October 2014, http://www.worldbank.org/en/ results/2014/10/21/xpanding-access-to-financial-services-through-new-technological-channels-in-el-salvador.
52 Email correspondence with a representative of M-banco on April 7, 2016. Also see http://www.bcr.gob.sv/bcrsite/ uploaded/content/category/930721012.pdf; http://www. bcr.gob.sv/bcrsite/uploaded/content/category/919785772. pdf; and http://www.bcr.gob.sv/bcrsite/uploaded/content/ category/1006286489.pdf.
2 Adult population figures for 2015 were calculated using data from the World Bank's World Development Indicators database, available at http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators.
10 "Press Release: Data Services and Mobile Money Solutions to Drive Mobile Communications Markets of the DRC and Ethiopia," Frost & Sullivan, 24 July 2014, http://www.frost.com/prod/ servlet/press-release.pag?docid=291589016.
12 "Measurable Goals with Optimal Impact: 2014 Maya Declaration Progress Report," Alliance for Financial Inclusion, 9 September 2014, 23, http://www.afi-global.org/sites/default/files/ publications/2014_maya_declaration_progress_report_final_ low_res.pdf.
16 "Licensing and Supervision of the Business of Financial Institutions: Regulation of Mobile and Agent Banking Services: Directives No. FIS/01/2012," National Bank of Ethiopia, 2012, http://www.nbe.gov.et/pdf/directives/microfinancebusiness/ FIS-01-2012.pdf.
18 "Licensing and Supervision of the Business of Financial Institutions: Regulation of Mobile and Agent Banking Services: Directives No. FIS/01/2012," National Bank of Ethiopia, 2012, 3, http://www.nbe.gov.et/pdf/directives/microfinancebusiness/ FIS-01-2012.pdf..
Transfer and Transaction Easing Life in Ethiopia," The Ethiopian Herald via AIIAfrica, 22 April 2016, http://allafrica.com/ stories/201604221118.html.
2 Adult population figures for 2015 were calculated using data from the World Bank's World Development Indicators database, available at http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators.
10 Note that 2014 data for these commercial bank branch and ATM indicators were not available for Haiti via the International Monetary Fund's Financial Access Survey.
14 As noted by a representative of the Banque de la Republique d'Haiti in email correspondence on May 8, 2016, the Global Findex figures for Haiti are expected to be adjusted in the future, as the legal age in Haiti to open an account is 18.
20 Email correspondence with a representative of the Banque de la Republique d'Haiti on May 8, 2016.
26 Jamie M. Zimmerman, Kristy Bohling, and Sarah Rotman Parker, "Electronic G2P Payments: Evidence from Four Lower Income Countries," Focus Note No. 93, CGAP, April 2014, 6, http:// www.cgap.org/sites/default/files/Focus-Note-Electronic-G2P-Payments-April-2014.pdf.
32 Jamie M. Zimmerman, Kristy Bohling, and Sarah Rotman Parker, "Electronic G2P Payments: Evidence from Four Lower Income Countries," Focus Note No. 93, CGAP, April 2014, 2, http:// www.cgap.org/sites/default/files/Focus-Note-Electronic-G2P-Payments-April-2014.pdf.
34 Jamie M. Zimmerman, Kristy Bohling, and Sarah Rotman Parker, "Electronic G2P Payments: Evidence from Four Lower Income Countries," Focus Note No. 93, CGAP, April 2014, 4, http:// www.cgap.org/sites/default/files/Focus-Note-Electronic-G2P-Payments-April-2014.pdf.
36 Jamie M. Zimmerman, Kristy Bohling, and Sarah Rotman Parker, "Electronic G2P Payments: Evidence from Four Lower Income Countries," Focus Note No. 93, CGAP, April 2014, 7, http:// www.cgap.org/sites/default/files/Focus-Note-Electronic-G2P-Payments-April-2014.pdf.
38 Jamie M. Zimmerman, Kristy Bohling, and Sarah Rotman Parker, "Electronic G2P Payments: Evidence from Four Lower Income Countries," Focus Note No. 93, CGAP, April 2014, 11, http:// www.cgap.org/sites/default/files/Focus-Note-Electronic-G2P-Payments-April-2014.pdf.
40 Strategie Nationale d'Inclusion Financiere," Banque de la Republique d'Haiti (in collaboration with the World Bank), Undated, http://www.brh.net/documents/strategie_inclusion_ fin.pdf.
45 "Lignes Directrices Relatives A La Banque A Distance," Banque de la Republique d'Haiti, 2010, http://www.brh.net/circulaires/ ld.pdf. Also see analysis within the downloadable Excel document associated with the Economist Intelligence Unit's "Global Microscope 2015: The Enabling Environment for Financial Inclusion" report, available at http://www.eiu.com/public/ topical_report.aspx?campaignid=MicroscopeDec2015.
48 Ignacio Mas and Claire Alexandre, "Mexico, Indonesia and Haiti Advance Financial Inclusion with Bold Approaches to Account Opening," Center for Financial Inclusion at Accion Blog, 19 January 2012, http://cfi-blog.org/2012/01/19/mexico-indonesia-and-haiti-advance-financial-inclusion-with-bold-approaches-to-account-opening/.
1 See the World Bank's World Development Indicators data for GDP at market prices (current USD) as of 2014, available at http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators.
3 See the GSMA's GSMA Intelligence database, available (with subscription) at https://gsmaintelligence.com. Figures reflect Q1 2016 GSMA Intelligence data. See the methodology section of this report for the GSMA's definition of unique mobile subscribership.
7 Asli Demirguc-Kunt, Leora Klapper, Dorothe Singer, and Peter Van Oudheusden, "The Global Findex Database 2014: Measuring Financial Inclusion around the World," Policy Research Working Paper 7255, World Bank, April 2015, 26, http://www-wds. worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/ IB/2015/04/15/090224b082dca3aa/1_0/Rendered/PDF/ The0Global0Fin0ion0around0the0world.pdf#page=3.
Measuring Financial Inclusion around the World," The World Bank Group, April 2015, 59, http://www-wds. worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/ IB/2015/04/15/090224b082dca3aa/1_0/Rendered/PDF/ The0Global0Fin0ion0around0the0world.pdf#page=3.
10 "FM: Record Number of 11.50 Crore Bank Accounts Opened Under Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana (PMJDY) as on 17th January 2015 against the original Target of 7.5 Crore by 26th January, 2015," Press Information Bureau, 20 January 2015, http://pib.nic.in/newsite/PrintRelease.aspx?relid=114810.
13 A "full-service bank account" in this context refers to accounts with banks that offer a full suite of financial services, including formal savings. See "India: Wave Report FII Tracker Survey: Conducted June-October 2015," Financial Inclusion Insights, InterMedia, March 2016, 19, http://finclusion.org/uploads/file/ reports/InterMedia%20FII%20Wave%203%202015%20India.pdf.
23 IFC Mobile Money Scoping Country Report: India," International Finance Corporation, June 2013, 8, http://www.ifc.org/ wps/wcm/connect/49a11580407b921190f790cdd0ee9c33/ India+Scoping+report+063013+for+publication. pdf?MOD=AJPERES.
27 According to a 2013 report by the International Finance Corporation, business correspondents (BCs) are defined as "representative[s] authorized to offer services such as cash transactions where the lender does not have a branch." See "IFC Mobile Money Scoping Country Report: India," International Finance Corporation, June 2013, 32, http://www.ifc.org/ wps/wcm/connect/49a11580407b921190f790cdd0ee9c33/ India+Scoping+report+063013+for+publication. pdf?MOD=AJPERES.
30 There are three major agent network models, including banks that directly manage agent networks, business correspondent network managers, and MNOs that manage agent networks.
31 Aakash Mehrotra and Denny George, "Agent Network Accelerator Survey: India Country Report 2015," Helix Institute of Digital Finance, August 2015, 4, http://www.helix-institute. com/sites/default/files/Publications/Agent%20Network%20 Accelerator%20Survey%20-%20India%20Country%20 Report%202015_0.pdf.
33 Akhand Tiwari, Lokesh K Singh, Mukesh Sadana and Puneet Chopra, "The Curious Case of Missing Agents in Rural India," MicroSave India Focus Note 105, January 2014, http://www. microsave.net/files/pdf/IFN_105_The_Curious_Case_of_ Missing_Agents_in_Rural_India_MicroSave.pdf.
35 Aakash Mehrotra and Denny George, "Agent Network Accelerator Survey: India Country Report 2015," Helix Institute of Digital Finance, August 2015, 11, http://www.helix-institute. com/sites/default/files/Publications/Agent%20Network%20 Accelerator%20Survey%20-%20India%20Country%20 Report%202015_0.pdf.
37 "Beyond Cash: Why India Loves Cash and Why That Matters for Financial Inclusion," USAID and the U.S. Global Development Lab, January 2016, https://www.globalinnovationexchange.org/ beyond-cash.
39 "RBI grants 'in-principle' approval to 11 Applicants for Payments Banks," Reserve Bank of India, 19 August 2015, https://www.rbi. org.in/Scripts/BS_PressReleaseDisplay.aspx?prid=34754.
42 "A Partnership to Support Financial Inclusion Through Expanded Payments Acceptance Networks and Other Efforts: Compendium of merchant and consumer quantitative survey insights," USAID, 17 November 2015, 11, https://giexchange-www.s3.amazonaws. com/s3fs-public/asset/document/1.%20USAID%20India%20 Digital%20Payments%20Quantitative%20Research%20 Findings_1.pdf?MRNJjETeewvi3m9sjZA2lzH0xGjAMIuC.
46 "A Partnership to Support Financial Inclusion Through Expanded Payments Acceptance Networks and Other Efforts: Compendium of merchant and consumer quantitative survey insights," USAID, 17 November 2015, 77, https://giexchange-www.s3.amazonaws. com/s3fs-public/asset/document/1.%20USAID%20India%20 Digital%20Payments%20Quantitative%20Research%20 Findings_1.pdf?MRNJjETeewvi3m9sjZA2lzH0xGjAMIuC.
54 Kabir Kumar and Sanjay Jain, "India Stack to bridge the digital divide in our country," The Economic Times, 29 February 2016, http://blogs.economictimes.indiatimes.com/et-commentary/ india-stack-to-bridge-the-digital-divide-in-our-country/.
58 Jay Pullar, "India Stack takes the Digital India campaign to a whole new level," ProductNation, 21 December 2015, http:// pn.ispirt.in/india-stack-takes-the-digital-india-campaign-to-a-whole-new-level/.
60 Kabir Kumar and Dan Radcliffe, "Can India Achieve Universal Digital Financial Inclusion?," CGAP, 20 January 2015, http://www. cgap.org/blog/can-india-achieve-universal-digital-financial-inclusion.
62 Aakash Mehrotra and Denny George, "Agent Network Accelerator Survey: India Country Report 2015," Helix Institute of Digital Finance, August 2015, 16, http://www.helix-institute. com/sites/default/files/Publications/Agent%20Network%20 Accelerator%20Survey%20-%20India%20Country%20 Report%202015_0.pdf.
64 "NABARD, J&K Bank to Join Hands for Financial Literacy Campaign," Daily Excelsior, 21 January 2016, http://www. dailyexcelsior.com/nabard-jk-bank-to-join-hands-for-financial-literacy-campaign/.
68 "Govt policies fail to protect migrants: Gandihigram VC," The Times of India, 11 February 2016, http://timesofindia.indiatimes. com/city/madurai/Govt-policies-fail-to-protect-migrants-Gandhigram-VC/articleshow/50940559.cms.
70 Leora Klapper, "The gender gap in financial inclusion and the 2014 Global Findex," Reuters, 21 April 2015, http://news.trust. org//item/20150421184902-4usvh/.
72 "A Partnership to Support Financial Inclusion Through Expanded Payments Acceptance Networks and Other Efforts: Research findings from human-centered design (HCD) research," USAID, 20 October 2015, https://giexchange-www.s3.amazonaws. com/s3fs-public/asset/document/2.%20USAID%20India%20 Digital%20Payments%20Qualitative%20Research%20 Findings_2.pdf?YG2PVrlfjf91CXiFlYCmclqiy2N3kbso.
1 See the World Bank's World Development Indicators data for GDP at market prices (current USD) as of 2014, available at http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators.
3 See the GSMA's GSMA Intelligence database, available (with subscription) at https://gsmaintelligence.com. Figures reflect Q1 2016 GSMA Intelligence data. See the methodology section of this report for the GSMA's definition of unique mobile subscribership.
9 "Measurable Goals with Optimal Impact: 2014 Maya Declaration Progress Report," Alliance for Financial Inclusion, 9 September 2014, 24, http://www.afi-global.org/sites/default/files/ publications/2014_maya_declaration_progress_report_final_ low_res.pdf.
25 Fauzan Jamaludin, "New Phase Development of Branchless Banking," The Citizen Daily, 11 July 2014, http://en.citizendaily. net/new-phase-development-of-branchless-banking/.
33 "New Indonesia Branchless Banking and Microfinance Laws - a catalyst for microfinance growth?," KPMG, Undated, http:// www.kpmg.com/ID/en/IssuesAndInsights/ArticlesPublications/ Documents/Financial%20Inclusion%20in%20Indonesia.pdf.
37 Ghiyazuddin A Mohammad, "Digital Financial Services in Indonesia - Findings from the Agent Network Accelerator Research," ITU, MicroSave, and Helix Institute of Digital Finance, October 2015, https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-T/Workshops-and-Seminars/bsg/201510/Documents/Presentations/S5P5_ Ghiyazuddin_Ali_Mohammad.pdf.
39 Grace D. Amianti, "OJK invites more players to join branchless banking program," The Jakarta Post, 17 May 2016, http://www. thejakartapost.com/news/2016/01/05/ojk-invites-more-players-join-branchless-banking-program.html.
43 Mochammad Gungun, "Telkomsel and Financial Services Bank Presents Connected TCASH-Bank's Wow!" [English translation via Google Translate], 18 April 2016, http://www. aksi.co/2016/04/18/technology/telkomsel-dan-btpn-hadirkan-layanan-keuangan-terhubung-tcash-btpn-wow/.
45 Shelley Spencer, Joey Mendoza, Eky Amrullah, Afandy Djauhari, Anita Dwipuspita, and Rahmi Nydiasari, "Digital Financial Services in Indonesia," USAID, NetHope, GBI, and e-MITRA, December 2015, http://solutionscenter.nethope.org/assets/ collaterals/MFS_eMITRAIndonesia-December20151.pdf.
49 "Indonesia: Wave Report FII Tracker Survey Conducted August-November 2015," Financial Inclusion Insights, InterMedia, February 2016, 10, http://finclusion.org/uploads/file/reports/ Indonesia%20Wave%202%20Wave%20Report.pdf.
2 Adult population figures for 2015 were calculated using data from the World Bank's World Development Indicators database, available at http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators.
6 "Kenya witnesses 50% increase in financial inclusion in last decade," FSD Kenya, 18 February 2016, http://fsdkenya.org/ news/kenya-witnesses-50-increase-in-financial-inclusion-in-last-decade/.
8 "Connected Women: Women and Mobile Money - Insights from Kenya," GSMA, February 2016, http://www.gsma.com/ mobilefordevelopment/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/ Connected-Women-Women-and-Mobile-Money-Insights-from-Kenya-Nov15.pdf.
15 "Digital Pathways to Financial Inclusion: Findings from the First FII Tracker Survey in Kenya," InterMedia, July 2014, 9, http:// finclusion.org/uploads/file/reports/FII-Kenya-Wave-One-Wave-Report.pdf.
19 Brian Muthiora, "Enabling Mobile Money Policies in Kenya: Fostering a Digital Financial Revolution," GSMA, January 2015, 20, http://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/wp-content/ uploads/2015/02/2015_MMU_Enabling-Mobile-Money-Policies-in-Kenya.pdf.
22 "National Payment System Regulations, 2014," Kenya Gazette Supplement No. 119, 1 August 2014, http://www.gsma.com/ mobilefordevelopment/wp-content/uploads/2014/08/ NPSRegulationsLegalNoticeNo-2-109.pdf.
30 "Kenya: Digital Pathways to Financial Inclusion: 2014 Survey report," Financial Inclusion Insights, InterMedia, February 2015, 76, http://finclusion.org/uploads/file/reports/InterMedia-FII-Kenya-2014-Wave-2-summary-report.pdf.
32 Benjamin Muriuki, "Here are the Features of Equity Bank's New Thin Sim Card," 20 July 2015, http://www.kenyans.co.ke/news/ here-are-features-equity-banks-new-thin-sim-card.
34 Hilary Heuler, "Africa's new thin SIM cards: The line between banks and telcos just got thinner," 19 November 2014, http:// www.zdnet.com/article/africas-new-thin-sim-cards-the-line-between-banks-and-telcos-just-got-thinner/.
38 "Safaricom to switch M-Pesa off to test major upgrade," Business Daily, 15 April 2016, http://www.businessdailyafrica.com/ Corporate-News/Safaricom-begins-moving-M-Pesa-servers-to-Kenya/-/539550/2686674/-/ud3nqi/-/index.html.
42 "Safaricom Partners with Vodacom for Financial Inclusion in Kenya and Tanzania," CGAP Microfinance Gateway, 10 March 2015, http://www.microfinancegateway.org/announcement/ safaricom-partners-vodacom-financial-inclusion-kenya-and-tanzania.
47 "Connected Women: Women and Mobile Money - Insights from Kenya," GSMA, February 2016, http://www.gsma.com/ mobilefordevelopment/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/ Connected-Women-Women-and-Mobile-Money-Insights-from-Kenya-Nov15.pdf.
49 "Connected Women: Women and Mobile Money - Insights from Kenya," GSMA, February 2016, http://www.gsma.com/ mobilefordevelopment/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/ Connected-Women-Women-and-Mobile-Money-Insights-from-Kenya-Nov15.pdf.
1 See the World Bank's World Development Indicators data for GDP at market prices (current USD) as of 2014, available at http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators.
3 See the GSMA's GSMA Intelligence database, available (with subscription) at https://gsmaintelligence.com. Figures reflect Q1 2016 GSMA Intelligence data. See the methodology section of this report for the GSMA's definition of unique mobile subscribership.
9 Jamie M. Zimmerman, Kristy Bohling, Brian Le Sar, Brian Loeb, Neil Nyirongo, and Titus Kavalo, "Country Diagnostic: Malawi," Bankable Frontier Associates and Better Than Cash Alliance, March 2015, https://www.betterthancash.org/tools-research/ case-studies/country-diagnostic-malawi.
15 "The Malawi National Strategy for Financial Inclusion (20102014)," Ministry of Finance Financial Sector Development Unit, Economic Affairs Division, January 2010, 14, http://www. finance.gov.mw/fspu/index.php/financial-sector-laws/strategy-documents/49-2010-2014-national-strategy-for-financial-inclusion/file.
19 "Measurable Goals with Optimal Impact: 2014 Maya Declaration Progress Report," Alliance for Financial Inclusion, 2014, 25, http://www.afi-global.org/sites/default/files/publications/2014_ maya_declaration_progress_report_final_low_res.pdf.
24 FSTAP is a five year program that was launched in 2011 with funding from the World Bank. Its objective is to increase access to finance for underserved populations by advancing enabling regulation and supervision, financial infrastructure, consumer protection and financial literacy, and financial sector policy. See "Malawi - Financial Sector Technical Assistance Project," The World Bank, 2011, http://www.worldbank.org/projects/P122616/ malawi-financial-sector-technical-assistance-project?lang=en.
26 Jeremy Gray, Catherine Denoon-Stevens, Mia Thom, Albert van der Linden, and Tyler Tappendorf, "Malawi: Demand, Supply, Policy, and Regulation: Malawi Country Diagnostic Report 2015," MAP, Cenfri, Finmark Trust, and UNCDF, 2015, 31, http:// cenfri.org/documents/MAP/2015/Malawi/MAP%20Malawi%20 Diagnostic%20Report.pdf.
30 Jonathan Greenacre, Louise Malady, and Ross Buckley, "The Regulation of Mobile Money in Malawi: Project Report," UNCDF, March 2014, 19, http://www.uncdf.org/sites/default/files/ Documents/the_regulation_of_mobile_money_in_malawi_ project_report_final_version.pdf.
32 Jonathan Greenacre, Louise Malady, and Ross Buckley, "The Regulation of Mobile Money in Malawi: Project Report," UNCDF, March 2014, 35, http://www.uncdf.org/sites/default/files/ Documents/the_regulation_of_mobile_money_in_malawi_ project_report_final_version.pdf.
34 Jeremy Gray, Catherine Denoon-Stevens, Mia Thom, Albert van der Linden, Tyler Tappendorf, "Malawi: Demand, Supply, Policy, and Regulation: Malawi Country Diagnostic Report 2015," MAP, Cenfri, Finmark Trust, and UNCDF, 2015, xvii, http:// cenfri.org/documents/MAP/2015/Malawi/MAP%20Malawi%20 Diagnostic%20Report.pdf.
36 Harold Kapindu, "Malawi launches 2016 World Development Report: World Bank's influential publication," Nyasa Times, 28 April 2016, http://www.nyasatimes.com/malawi-launches-2016-world-development-report-world-banks-influential-publication/.
1 See the World Bank's World Development Indicators data for GDP at market prices (current USD) as of 2014, available at http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators.
3 See the GSMA's GSMA Intelligence database, available (with subscription) at https://gsmaintelligence.com. Figures reflect Q1 2016 GSMA Intelligence data. See the methodology section of this report for the GSMA's definition of unique mobile subscribership.
14 "Measurable Goals with Optimal Impact: 2014 Maya Declaration Progress Report," Alliance for Financial Inclusion, 2014, 26, http://www.afi-global.org/sites/default/files/publications/2014_ maya_declaration_progress_report_final_low_res.pdf.
22 Xavier Faz, "Mexico's Tiered KYC: An Update on Market Response," CGAP, 25 June 2013, http://www.cgap.org/blog/ mexicos-tiered-kyc-update-market-response.
24 "IFC Mobile Money Scoping Country Report: Mexico," International Finance Corporation, 29 July 2011, 7, http://www.ifc. org/wps/wcm/connect/37512b004a052b268adeffdd29332b51/ Mexico+Public.pdf?MOD=AJPERES.
28 "Reporte Nacional de Inclusion Financiera 7," Consejo Nacional de Inclusion Financiera, 2016, 7, http://www.cnbv.gob. mx/Inclusi%C3%B3n/Documents/Reportes%20de%20IF/ Reporte%20de%20Inclusion%20Financiera%207.pdf.
36 "2015 Maya Declaration Progress Report: Commitments Into Action," Alliance for Financial Inclusion, December 2015, 28, http://www.afi-global.org/sites/default/files/publications/2015_ maya_report_rev.1_low_res.pdf.
1 See the World Bank's World Development Indicators data for GDP at market prices (current USD) as of 2014, available at http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators.
3 See the GSMA's GSMA Intelligence database, available (with subscription) at https://gsmaintelligence.com. Figures reflect Q1 2016 GSMA Intelligence data. See the methodology section of this report for the GSMA's definition of unique mobile subscribership.
10 "Global Financial Development Report 2014: Financial Inclusion," The World Bank, 2014, 101, http:// siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTGLOBALFINREPORT/ Resources/8816096-1361888425203/9062080-1364927957721/ GFDR-2014_Complete_Report.pdf.
13 "Circular to all banks and other financial institutions: Introduction of Three-Tiered Know Your Customer (KYC) Requirements," Central Bank of Nigeria, 18 January 2013, http://www.cenbank. org/out/2013/ccd/3%20tiered%20kyc%20requirements.pdf.
19 Prateek Shrivastava, "The Hold-Up with Mobile Money in Nigeria," Center for Financial Inclusion at Accion, 13 August 2015, http://cfi-blog.org/2015/08/13/the-hold-up-with-mobile-money-in-nigeria/.
23 Prateek Shrivastava, "The Hold-Up with Mobile Money in Nigeria," Center for Financial Inclusion at Accion, 13 August 2015, http://cfi-blog.org/2015/08/13/the-hold-up-with-mobile-money-in-nigeria/.
27 "Mobile Money gets boost as CBN loosens restriction on telcos," Business News, 3 September 2015, http://businessnews.com. ng/2015/09/03/mobile-money-gets-boost-as-cbn-loosens-restriction-on-telcos/.
29 "Exposure Draft on the Standards and Guidelines on Electronic Channels Operations in Nigeria," Central Bank of Nigeria, 9 September 2015, http://www.cenbank.org/out/2015/bpsd/ exposure%20draft%20on%20the%20standards%20and%20 guidelines%20on%20electronic%20channels%20operations%20 in%20nigeria%20(2).pdf.
33 "LBS, Gates Foundation embark on new research initiative for 80% financial inclusion," Business Day, 22 January 2016, https:// businessdayonline.com/2016/01/lbs-gates-foundation-embark-on-new-research-initiative-for-80-financial-inclusion/.
41 Bassey Udo, "Fraud in Nigerian banks fell by N3.96 billion in 2015  CBN," Premium Times, 10 February 2016, http://www. premiumtimesng.com/business/business-news/198264-fraud-nigerian-banks-fell-n3-96-billion-2015-cbn.html.
2 Adult population figures for 2015 were calculated using data from the World Bank's World Development Indicators database, available at http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators.
6 Simone di Castri, "Mobile Money: Enabling regulatory solutions," Mobile Money for the Unbanked (MMU), GSMA, February 2013, 22, http://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/wp-content/ uploads/2013/02/MMU-Enabling-Regulatory-Solutions-di-Castri-2013.pdf.
8 "Maya Declaration: Commitment Made by the State Bank of Pakistan," Alliance for Financial Inclusion, 2011, http://www.afi-global.org/library/publications/maya-declaration-commitment-made-state-bank-pakistan.
14 "Quarterly Branchless Banking Newsletter, Issue 17: July-September 2015: Leveraging Technologies and Partnerships to Promote Financial Inclusion," State Bank of Pakistan, 2015, http://www.sbp.org.pk/publications/acd/BranchlessBanking-Jul-Sep-2015.pdf.
18 Simone di Castri, "Mobile Money: Enabling regulatory solutions," Mobile Money for the Unbanked, GSMA, February 2013, 22, http://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/wp-content/ uploads/2013/02/MMU-Enabling-Regulatory-Solutions-di-Castri-2013.pdf.
20 Simone di Castri, "Mobile Money: Enabling regulatory solutions," Mobile Money for the Unbanked, GSMA, February 2013, 22, http://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/wp-content/ uploads/2013/02/MMU-Enabling-Regulatory-Solutions-di-Castri-2013.pdf.
22 "Asaan Account: Guidelines on Low Risk Bank Accounts with Simplified Due Diligence for Banks & MFBs (Issued via BPRD Circular No. 11 of 2015)," State Bank of Pakistan, 2015, 4, http:// www.sbp.org.pk/bprd/2015/C11-Guidelines.pdf.
24 "Press Release: Finance Minister launches National Financial Inclusion Strategy for Pakistan," State Bank of Pakistan, 22 May 2015, http://www.sbp.org.pk/press/2015/FM-22-May-2015.pdf.
28 "Pakistan Plans to Bring Millions More Citizens into the Economy by Digitizing Payments," Better Than Cash Alliance, 22 September 2015, https://www.betterthancash.org/news/media-releases/pakistan-plans-to-bring-millions-more-citizens-into-the-economy-by-digitizing-payments.
30 "What Will It Take for Pakistan to Achieve Financial Inclusion?," The World Bank, 8 February 2016, http://www.worldbank.org/ en/news/feature/2016/02/08/what-will-it-take-for-pakistan-to-achieve-financial-inclusion.
1 See the World Bank's World Development Indicators data for GDP at market prices (current USD) as of 2014, available at http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators.
3 See the GSMA's GSMA Intelligence database, available (with subscription) at https://gsmaintelligence.com. Figures reflect Q1 2016 GSMA Intelligence data. See the methodology section of this report for the GSMA's definition of unique mobile subscribership.
14 "Global Microscope 2014: The enabling environment for financial inclusion," The Economist Intelligence Unit, Sponsored by MIF/ IDB, CAF, ACCION, and Citi, 2014, 56, http://www.eiu.com/ public/topical_report.aspx?campaignid=microscope2014.
18 "IFC Mobile Money Scoping Country Report: Peru," International Finance Corporation, 5 September 2011, 7, http://www.ifc.org/ wps/wcm/connect/ff940d804a02ec039d90fdd1a5d13d27/ Peru+Public.pdf?MOD=AJPERES.
20 Giovanna Priale Reyes and Denise Dias, "Financial Inclusion and Consumer Protection in Peru: The branchless banking business," CGAP and Superintendence of Banks, Insurance and AFPs, 15 February 2010, 16, http://www.cgap.org/publications/financial-inclusion-and-consumer-protection-peru.
22 "The Use of Financial Inclusion Data Country Case Study: Peru - Fine-Turning Based on Access Indicators," Superintendencia de Banca, Seguros y AFP, Peru and the Alliance for Financial Inclusion (AFI) Financial Inclusion Data Working Group, January 2014, 7, http://www.gpfi.org/sites/default/files/documents/ The%20Use%20of%20Financial%20Inclusion%20Data%20 Country%20Case%20Study_Peru_0.pdf.
24 Klaus Prochaska, "Peru leads the way to new approach for digital financial services to promote financial inclusion in Latin America," Alliance for Financial Inclusion, 5 March 2014, https:// blogs.afi-global.org/2014/03/05/peru-leads-the-way-to-new-approach-for-digital-financial-services-to-promote-financial-inclusion-in-latin-america/.
26 "The Use of Financial Inclusion Data Country Case Study: Peru -Fine-Tuning Regulation Based on Access Indicators," Prepared by Superintendencia de Banca, Seguros y AFP, Peru and the AFI Financial Inclusion Data Working Group on behalf of the Data and Measurement sub-group of the Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion, January 2014, 7, http://www.gpfi.org/sites/ default/files/documents/The%20Use%20of%20Financial%20 Inclusion%20Data%20Country%20Case%20Study_Peru_0.pdf.
28 Javier Alonso, Santiago Fernandez de Lis, Carlos Lopez-Moctezuma, Rosario Sanchez and David Tuesta, "The potential of mobile banking in Peru as a mechanism for financial inclusion," BBVA Research Working Paper No. 13/25, August 2013, 6, http:// www.rrojasdatabank.info/mobilebanking5.pdf.
30 "The Use of Financial Inclusion Data Country Case Study: Peru -Fine-Turning Based on Access Indicators," Superintendencia de Banca, Seguros y AFP, Peru and the AFI Financial Inclusion Data Working Group, January 2014, 5, http://www.gpfi.org/sites/ default/files/documents/The%20Use%20of%20Financial%20 Inclusion%20Data%20Country%20Case%20Study_Peru_0.pdf.
32 "The Use of Financial Inclusion Data Country Case Study: Peru - Fine-Turning Based on Access Indicators," Superintendencia de Banca, Seguros y AFP, Peru and the AFI Financial Inclusion Data Working Group, January 2014, 5 (footnote 2), http://www. gpfi.org/sites/default/files/documents/The%20Use%20of%20 Financial%20Inclusion%20Data%20Country%20Case%20Study_ Peru_0.pdf.
34 Javier Alonso, Santiago Fernandez de Lis, Carlos Lopez-Moctezuma, Rosario Sanchez and David Tuesta, "The potential of mobile banking in Peru as a mechanism for financial inclusion," BBVA Research Working Paper No. 13/25, August 2013, 7-8, http://www.rrojasdatabank.info/mobilebanking5.pdf.
36 Sonja E. Kelly, "Peru's National Financial Inclusion Strategy Charts New Path," Center for Financial Inclusion at Accion, 24 July 2015, https://cfi-blog.org/2015/07/24/perus-national-financial-inclusion-strategy-charts-new-path/.
38 "Ericsson and ASBANC launch connected mobile money service in Peru," Ericsson, 16 February 2016, http://www.ericsson.com/ news/1986139.
1 See the World Bank's World Development Indicators data for GDP at market prices (current USD) as of 2014, available at http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators.
3 See the GSMA's GSMA Intelligence database, available (with subscription) at https://gsmaintelligence.com. Figures reflect Q1 2016 GSMA Intelligence data. See the methodology section of this report for the GSMA's definition of unique mobile subscribership.
9 "Report on the State of Financial Inclusion in the Philippines," Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, 2014, 37, http://www.bsp.gov.ph/ downloads/Publications/2014/Financial%20Inclusion.pdf.
14 "Report on the State of Financial Inclusion in the Philippines," Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, 2014, 6, http://www.bsp.gov.ph/ downloads/Publications/2014/Financial%20Inclusion.pdf.
17 "Report on the State of Financial Inclusion in the Philippines," Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, 2011, 1, http://www.bsp.gov.ph/ downloads/Publications/2011/Financial%20Inclusion.pdf.
30 "BSP and Industry Launches the National Retail Payment System," Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, December 2015, http:// www.bsp.gov.ph/publications/media.asp?id=3948.
32 "Financial Inclusion in the Philippines: Issue No. 5, First Quarter 2015," Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, 2015, http://www.bsp.gov. ph/downloads/Publications/2015/FIP_1Qtr2015.pdf.
38 Melissa Luz T. Lopez, "BSP lifts ban on new bank licenses," Business World, 18 May 2016, http://www.bworldonline.com/ content.php?section=TopStory&title=bsp-lifts-ban-on-new-bank-licenses&id=122917.
1 See the World Bank's World Development Indicators data for GDP at market prices (current USD) as of 2014, available at http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators.
3 See the GSMA's GSMA Intelligence database, available (with subscription) at https://gsmaintelligence.com. Figures reflect Q1 2016 GSMA Intelligence data. See the methodology section of this report for the GSMA's definition of unique mobile subscribership.
11 "Measurable Goals with Optimal Impact: 2014 Maya Declaration Progress Report," Alliance for Financial Inclusion, 2014, 31, http://www.afi-global.org/sites/default/files/publications/2014_ maya_declaration_progress_report_final_low_res.pdf.
13 A. Michael Andrews, Keith Jefferis, Robert Hannah, and Paul Murgatroyd, "Rwanda: Financial Sector Development Program II," October 2012, 8, http://www.minecofin.gov.rw/ fileadmin/templates/documents/Rwanda_Financial_Sector_ development_program_II.pdf.
15 "Maya Declaration: Commitment made by the National Bank of Rwanda," Alliance for Financial Inclusion, 2011, http://www.afi-global.org/library/publications/maya-declaration-commitment-made-national-bank-rwanda.
17 A. Michael Andrews, Keith Jefferis, Robert Hannah, and Paul Murgatroyd, "Rwanda: Financial Sector Development Program II," October 2012, viii, 11, http://www.minecofin.gov.rw/ fileadmin/templates/documents/Rwanda_Financial_Sector_ development_program_II.pdf.
23 A. Michael Andrews, Keith Jefferis, Robert Hannah, and Paul Murgatroyd, "Rwanda: Financial Sector Development Program II," October 2012, 16, http://www.minecofin.gov.rw/ fileadmin/templates/documents/Rwanda_Financial_Sector_ development_program_II.pdf.
26 A. Michael Andrews, Keith Jefferis, Robert Hannah, and Paul Murgatroyd, "Rwanda: Financial Sector Development Program II," October 2012, 16, 19, http://www.minecofin.gov.rw/ fileadmin/templates/documents/Rwanda_Financial_Sector_ development_program_II.pdf.
28 A. Michael Andrews, Keith Jefferis, Robert Hannah, and Paul Murgatroyd, "Rwanda: Financial Sector Development Program II," October 2012, 17, http://www.minecofin.gov.rw/ fileadmin/templates/documents/Rwanda_Financial_Sector_ development_program_II.pdf.
43 "Govt, Ericsson ink deal on financial inclusion drive," The New Times, 13 May 2016, http://www.newtimes.co.rw/section/ article/2016-05-13/199839/.
1 See the World Bank's World Development Indicators data for GDP at market prices (current USD) as of 2014, available at http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators.
3 See the GSMA's GSMA Intelligence database, available (with subscription) at https://gsmaintelligence.com. Figures reflect Q1 2016 GSMA Intelligence data. See the methodology section of this report for the GSMA's definition of unique mobile subscribership.
9 Sibusiso Tshabalala, "Why South Africa's largest mobile network, Vodacom, failed to grow M-PESA," Quartz Africa, 3 August 2015, http://qz.com/467887/why-south-africas-largest-mobile-network-vodacom-failed-to-grow-mpesa/.
12 "Alliance for Financial Inclusion (AFI) Official Member List," Alliance for Financial Inclusion, 4 March 2014, http://www.afi-global.org/library/publications/alliance-financial-inclusion-afi-official-member-list.
14 "The Use of Financial Inclusion Data Country Case Study: South Africa: The Mzansi Story and Beyond," Prepared by The National Treasury, South Africa and the AFI Financial Inclusion Data Working Group on behalf of the Data and Measurement subgroup of the GPFI, January 2014, 3, http://www.gpfi.org/sites/ default/files/documents/The%20Use%20of%20Financial%20 Inclusion%20Data%20Country%20Case%20Study_South%20 Africa.pdf.
17 According to a 2014 report,"LSM is the acronym for living standards measure, widely used in South Africa as an index of social welfare. It does not include but correlates closely with income. The higher the LSM, the higher the standard of living." LSM groups number 1-10. See "The Use of Financial Inclusion Data Country Case Study: South Africa: The Mzansi Story and Beyond," Prepared by The National Treasury, South Africa and the AFI Financial Inclusion Data Working Group on behalf of the Data and Measurement sub-group of the GPFI, January 2014, 3 (footnote 1), http://www.gpfi.org/sites/default/files/documents/ The%20Use%20of%20Financial%20Inclusion%20Data%20 Country%20Case%20Study_South%20Africa.pdf.
19 "South Africa: Economic Update - Focus on Financial Inclusion," The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the World Bank, 2013, 33, http://www.worldbank.org/content/ dam/Worldbank/document/Africa/South%20Africa/Report/ south-africa-economic-update-2013.05.pdf.
25 Idongesit Williams, "Regulatory frameworks and implementation patterns for Mobile Money in Africa: The Case of Kenya, Ghana, and Nigeria," Paper presented at Ghana ICT Conference, Accra, Ghana, 2013, https://www.researchgate. net/publication/236863291_Regulatory_frameworks_and_ Implementation_patterns_for_Mobile_Money_in_Africa_The_ case_of_Kenya_Ghana_and_Nigeria.
29 David Saunders, Neal Estey, and Barry Cooper, "Secure in Exclusion - early warning signs of a less inclusive financial sector in South Africa," Centre for Financial Regulation and Inclusion, 2016, http://cenfri.org/aml-cft/secure-in-exclusion-early-warning-signs-of-a-less-inclusive-financial-sector-in-south-africa.
2 Adult population figures for 2015 were calculated using data from the World Bank's World Development Indicators database, available at http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators.
6 "Measurable Goals with Optimal Impact: 2014 Maya Declaration Progress Report," Alliance for Financial Inclusion, 9 September 2014, 33, http://www.afi-global.org/sites/default/files/ publications/2014_maya_declaration_progress_report_final_ low_res.pdf.
9 "Maya Declaration: Commitment made by the Bank of Tanzania," Alliance for Financial Inclusion, 28 November 2011, http:// www.afi-global.org/library/publications/maya-declaration-commitment-made-bank-tanzania.
12 "National Financial Inclusion Framework: A Public-Private Stakeholders' Initiative (2014-2016)," Tanzania National Council for Financial Inclusion, 2013, 24, http://www.afi-global.org/sites/ default/files/publications/tanzania-national-financial-inclusion-framework-2014-2016.pdf.
16 "Monetary Policy Statement: The Mid-Year Review (2015/16)," Governor [of the] Bank of Tanzania, February 2016, 28, https:// www.bot-tz.org/Publications/MonetaryPolicyStatements/ MPS%20ENG%20FEB%202016.pdf.
22 "Tanzania: Central Bank Sets 80 Percent Financial Inclusion Target," Tanzania Daily News via AllAfrica, 12 February 2016, http://allafrica.com/stories/201602120505.html.
24 "Monetary Policy Statement: The Mid-Year Review (2015/16)," Governor [of the] Bank of Tanzania, February 2016, 28, https:// www.bot-tz.org/Publications/MonetaryPolicyStatements/ MPS%20ENG%20FEB%202016.pdf.
28 "Airtel Distributes Tshs 5.3 Billion to its Airtel Money Customers," 30 September 2015, http://africa.airtel.com/wps/wcm/connect/ africarevamp/africa/home/media/press-releases/airtel+ distributes+tshs+5.3+billion+to+its+airtel+money+customers.
30 "Tigo Tanzania pays $2.1 million in quarterly profit share to customers," Biztech Africa, 15 January 2015, http://www. biztechafrica.com/article/tigo-tanzania-pays-21-million-quarterly-profit-sha/10973/?section=telecoms#.Vp5eQ_krLcs.
32 "Tigo Tanzania launches innovative nano (Tigo Nivushe) lending scheme to its customers," Tigo, 17 March 2016, http://www.tigo-tanzania.africa-newsroom.com/press/tigo-tanzania-launches-innovative-nano-lending-scheme-to-its-customers.
36 Rosemary Mirondo, "Tanzania: Framework Unveiled to Raise Financial Literacy," The Citizen via AllAfrica, 23 February 2016, http://allafrica.com/stories/201602231013.html.
1 See the World Bank's World Development Indicators data for GDP at market prices (current USD) as of 2014, available at http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators.
3 See the GSMA's GSMA Intelligence database, available (with subscription) at https://gsmaintelligence.com. Figures reflect Q1 2016 GSMA Intelligence data. See the methodology section of this report for the GSMA's definition of unique mobile subscribership.
7 Burcu Tuzcu Ersin and A. Ulku Solak, "A Guide to Electronic Payment Regulations in Turkey," Moroglu Arseven, 26 June 2015, http://www.morogluarseven.com/news/guide-electronic-payment-regulations-turkey.
21 "Law on Payment and Securities Settlement Systems, Payment Services and Electronic Money Institutions," Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, 2013, 11, http://www.tcmb.gov.tr/wps/wcm/ connect/3deb8069-ce8d-4ba7-a31d-e075259aa60a/6493. pdf?MOD=AJPERES&CACHEID=3deb8069-ce8d-4ba7-a31d-e075259aa60a.
25 "Global Microscope 2014: The Enabling Environment for Financial Inclusion," Economist Intelligence Unit, Sponsored by MIF/IDB, CAF, ACCION and Citi, 2014, 40, http://www.eiu.com/public/ topical_report.aspx?campaignid=microscope2014.
28 Stefan Staschen, "Payment Innovations in Turkey: Not (Yet) Reaching the Unbanked," CGAP, 21 August 2015, http://www. cgap.org/blog/payment-innovations-turkey-not-yet-reaching-unbanked.
30 Stefan Staschen, "Payment Innovations in Turkey: Not (Yet) Reaching the Unbanked," CGAP, 21 August 2015, http://www. cgap.org/blog/payment-innovations-turkey-not-yet-reaching-unbanked.
2 Adult population figures for 2015 were calculated using data from the World Bank's World Development Indicators database, available at http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators.
8 Mark Keith Muhumuza, "Mobile money shutdown hits businesses hard," Daily Monitor, 22 February 2016, http://www.monitor. co.ug/Business/Mobile-money-shutdown-hits-businesses-hard/-/688322/3087028/-/fhjk0nz/-/index.html.
12 "Digital Pathways to Financial Inclusion: Findings from the Nationally Representative FII Tracker Survey in Uganda (Wave 1), Focus Group Discussions with Lapsed Users and Nonusers of Mobile Money, and Mobile Money Agent Research. Final Report," Financial Inclusion Insights, InterMedia, October 2014, 12, http:// finclusion.org/uploads/file/reports/FII-Uganda-Wave-One-Wave-Report.pdf.
17 "Digital Pathways to Financial Inclusion: Findings from the Nationally Representative FII Tracker Survey in Uganda (Wave 1), Focus Group Discussions with Lapsed Users and Nonusers of Mobile Money, and Mobile Money Agent Research. Final Report," Financial Inclusion Insights, InterMedia, October 2014, 8, http:// finclusion.org/uploads/file/reports/FII-Uganda-Wave-One-Wave-Report.pdf.
19 "Measurable Goals with Optimal Impact: 2014 Maya Declaration Progress Report," Alliance for Financial Inclusion, 2014, 34, http://www.afi-global.org/sites/default/files/publications/2014_ maya_declaration_progress_report_final_low_res.pdf.
23 "Digital Pathways to Financial Inclusion: Findings from the Nationally Representative FII Tracker Survey in Uganda (Wave 1), Focus Group Discussions with Lapsed Users and Nonusers of Mobile Money, and Mobile Money Agent Research. Final Report," Financial Inclusion Insights, InterMedia, October 2014, 12, http:// finclusion.org/uploads/file/reports/FII-Uganda-Wave-One-Wave-Report.pdf.
25 "Digital Pathways to Financial Inclusion: Findings from the Nationally Representative FII Tracker Survey in Uganda (Wave 1), Focus Group Discussions with Lapsed Users and Nonusers of Mobile Money, and Mobile Money Agent Research. Final Report," Financial Inclusion Insights, InterMedia, October 2014, 12, http:// finclusion.org/uploads/file/reports/FII-Uganda-Wave-One-Wave-Report.pdf.
27 Chris Bold, "New Bill, Big Changes in Digital Financial Services in Uganda," CGAP, 10 March 2016, http://www.cgap.org/blog/new-bill-big-changes-digital-financial-services-uganda.
29 Chris Bold, "New Bill, Big Changes in Digital Financial Services in Uganda," CGAP, 10 March 2016, http://www.cgap.org/blog/new-bill-big-changes-digital-financial-services-uganda.
37 Chris Bold and Rashmi Pillai, "The Impact of Shutting Down Mobile Money in Uganda," CGAP, 7 March 2016, http://www. cgap.org/blog/impact-shutting-down-mobile-money-uganda.
39 Mark Keith Muhumuza, "Mobile money shutdown hits businesses hard," Daily Monitor, 22 February 2016, http://www.monitor. co.ug/Business/Mobile-money-shutdown-hits-businesses-hard/-/688322/3087028/-/fhjk0nz/-/index.html.
41 "Uganda: Hackers Strike Bank of Uganda Accounts, Try to Steal Sh2.45 Billion," Daily Nation via AllAfrica, 17 March 2016, http:// allafrica.com/stories/201603170797.html.
2 Adult population figures for 2015 were calculated using data from the World Bank's World Development Indicators database, available at http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators.
6 Eric Duflos, "Opportunities for a Big Leap for Financial Inclusion in Vietnam?," CGAP, 11 May 2011, http://www.cgap.org/blog/ opportunities-big-leap-financial-inclusion-vietnam.
26 "Vietnam's Mobile Payments App MoMo With 50% Transaction Volume Growth per Month," Fintechnews Singapore, 28 September 2015, http://fintechnews.sg/728/mobilepayments/ momo_vietnams-mobile-payments-app-experiences-30-50-transaction-volume-growth-per-month/.
38 "Global Microscope 2015: The Enabling Environment for Financial Inclusion," Economist Intelligence Unit, December 2015, 49, http://www.eiu.com/public/topical_report. aspx?campaignid=MicroscopeDec2015.
48 "Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy: Volume 1: Vietnam," The World Bank, May 2015, 6, http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/'/media/GIAWB/FL/ Documents/Diagnostic-Reviews/Vietnam-CPFL-DiagReview-Volume-I-20150506-FINAL.pdf.
1 See the World Bank's World Development Indicators data for GDP at market prices (current USD) as of 2014, available at http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators.
3 See the GSMA's GSMA Intelligence database, available (with subscription) at https://gsmaintelligence.com. Figures reflect Q1 2016 GSMA Intelligence data. See the methodology section of this report for the GSMA's definition of unique mobile subscribership.
7 "Financially included" adults are defined in the survey as the percentage of individuals 16 years old or older who have/use financial services from formal and informal financial service providers. See "FinScope Zambia 2015," Bank of Zambia, 2015, "Quick facts," http://www.boz.zm/Publishing/77/77_FSD_ Zambia_Final%20II.pdf.
14 Audrey Linthorst, "Zambia Map of Financial Inclusion: National efforts tackle financial inclusion goals," Microfinance Information Exchange (MIX), August 2013, http://finclusionlab.org/blog/ zambia-map-financial-inclusion-national-efforts-tackle-financial-inclusion-goals.
24 "Measurable Goals with Optimal Impact: 2014 Maya Declaration Progress Report," Alliance for Financial Inclusion, 2014, 34, http://www.afi-global.org/sites/default/files/publications/2014_ maya_declaration_progress_report_final_low_res.pdf.
27 Denny Kalyalya, "Remarks at the Launch of the World Bank Financial Inclusion Support Framework," Bank of Zambia, 2 November 2015, 3, http://www.boz.zm/Publishing/Speeches/ BOZGovernorsSpeech-World%20bankFISFLaunch.pdf.
29 "Improving Financial Inclusion in Zambia: Remarks by Dr. Caleb Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the Celpay Mobile Banking Conference, Lusaka, 16-17 September 2009," September 2009, 2, http://www.bis.org/review/r090922c.pdf.
32 "2015 Maya Declaration Progress Report: Commitments into Action," Alliance for Financial Inclusion, December 2015, 48, http://www.afi-global.org/sites/default/files/publications/2015_ maya_report_rev.1_low_res.pdf.
34 Akhand Tiwari and Irene Wagaki, "Agent Network Accelerator Survey: Zambia Country Report 2015," Helix Institute of Digital Finance, January 2016, 6, http://www.helix-institute.com/sites/ default/files/Publications/160126%20Zambia%20Country%20 Report%20UNCDF%20Helix%20FINAL%20(1)_0.pdf.
38 Colleen Learch and Nandini Harihareswara, "Opportunities Abound: Zambian Consumers Want and Need Digital Financial Services," InterMedia, 24 February 2016, http://www.intermedia. org/opportunities-abound-zambian-consumers-want-and-need-digital-financial-services/.
1 We did not receive responses from financial inclusion experts in Egypt regarding our request for engagement.
3 We recognize that consumer protection is a complex and vitally important issue within the financial inclusion space, and that a full assessment of consumer protection goes beyond identifying the existence (or absence) of formal consumer protection frameworks. However, data constraints regarding certain consumer protection issues (e.g., the extent of consumer over-indebtedness) and the need to incorporate and balance a multitude of financial inclusion indicators within the scorecard limited the scope of consumer protection indicators we are able to integrate within the 2016 scorecard.
5 "Beyond Cash: Why India Loves Cash and Why That Matters for Financial Inclusion," USAID and U.S. Global Development Lab, January 2016, https://www.globalinnovationexchange.org/ beyond-cash.
inclusion, which is a component of financial capability. See Julia Arnold and Elisabeth Rhyne, "A Change in Behavior: Innovations in Financial Capability," Center for Financial Inclusion at Accion and JP Morgan Chase & Co., April 2016, https://centerfor financialinclusionblog.files.wordpress.com/2016/04/a-change-in-behavior-final.pdf.
11 Martin Cihak and Parabal Singh, "An Analysis of National Financial Inclusion Strategies," All About Finance Blog, The World Bank, 2 December 2013, http://blogs.worldbank.org/ allaboutfinance/analysis-national-financial-inclusion-strategies.
a payments bank (or equivalent), or through a "letter of no objection" to the non-bank or its partner bank, to constitute an "enabling" environment (note that the GSMA has additional criteria relating to cash-in/cash-out at agents, interoperability, and capital requirements). Therefore, countries that fit these criteria are awarded a 3 for this indicator. See http://www.gsma. com/mobilefordevelopment/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/ SOTIR_2014.pdf (page 71). We recognize that there are many non-bank mobile money providers beyond simply mobile network operators (MNOs); however, since data show that leadership of MNOs is generally associated with faster growing deployments, we focus on MNOs for the purposes of this study. See http://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/ is-regulation-holding-back-financial-inclusion-a-look-at-the-evidence and http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_ id=2578312 for further information.
be relaxed depending upon the level of perceived risk posed by the customer. The Financial Action Task Force states that a "progressive" know your customer/customer due diligenc approach allows transaction/payment limits to vary based on the level of documentation available from the customer confirming his/her identity. See "Anti-money laundering and terrorist financing measures," Financial Action Task Force Guidance, June 2011, 27, http://www.fatf-gafi.org/media/fatf/content/images/ AML%20CFT%20measures%20and%20financial%20inclusion. pdf.
20 Note that all scores for the indicators in the adoption dimension are based on data from the 2014 Global Financial Inclusion database (Global Findex).
22 2014 Global Findex data for this indicator was not available for Tanzania, Ethiopia, and Haiti. Our approach to missing numerical data was to assign the respective countries a composite indicator score comprising the average of all country scores for the indicatortherefore, for the percentage of wage earners who used a mobile phone to receive their salary or wages, Tanzania, Ethiopia, and Haiti each received a score of 1.
24 2014 Global Findex data for this indicator was not available for Afghanistan and Pakistan. As noted above, our approach to missing numerical data was to assign the respective countries a composite indicator score comprising the average of all country scores for the indicatortherefore, for the percentage of adults with an account at a bank or another type of financial institution who report that money is withdrawn from their account three or more times in a typical month, Afghanistan and Pakistan each received a composite score of 2.
The Brookings Institution is a nonprofit organization devoted to independent research and policy solutions. Its mission is to conduct high-quality, independent research and, based on that research, to provide innovative, practical recommendations for policymakers and the public. The conclusions and recommendations of any Brookings publication are solely those of its author(s), and do not reflect the views of the Institution, its management, or its other scholars.
Brookings recognizes that the value it provides is in its absolute commitment to quality, independence, and impact. Activities supported by its donors reflect this commitment.