Mobile money was first introduced in South Africa and the Philippines about 10 years ago (1). In March 2007, these services were followed in Kenya by "M-PESA" (M is for mobile, "pesa" is Swahili for "money '), which was to become that country's dominant (although not only) mobile money service. M-PESA has been celebrated internationally as an innovation that could bring the unbanked population into the formal financial system, with associated impacts on economic well-being and welfare (2).
We report the results of a study of the long-run impact that M-PESA has had on the economic lives of Kenyans. In earlier work (7-10) (see supplementary text), we showed that access to mobile money allowed individuals to protect themselves against income and health risks. Individuals could draw on a wider network of social support, and they received more remittances more quickly from more different types of people in response to negative shocks. We documented a greater number of transactions and larger transactions, both in response to unexpected adverse events (9) and overall (10). However, notwithstanding the short-term economic benefits of consumption smoothing, whether such a transformative financial innovation could also help to raise the level of consumption and lift people out of poverty over the longer term remained unresolved.
To identify the causal effects of M-PESA on the economic well-being of households, we used changes in access to mobile moneynot adoption itself. We measured access to the service by the geographic proximity of households to M-PESA agents. Agent density, quantified by the number of agents within 1 km of the household, exhibited large variation across our sample in 2014 (mean = 8.75, SD = 17.03).
In further support of the assumption that the agent rollout between 2008 and 2010 was exogenous to household characteristics, we conducted a falsification test [table 7A in (9), replicated as table S3]. Using data on consumption and unexpected shocks from another survey of rural Kenyan households, we showed that households living in areas that were later to see large increases in agent access experienced the same levels of risk sharing before the launch of M-PESA as those in areas that would later exhibit less agent growth. A similar exercise shows that earlier levels of household per capita consumption were not correlated with the level or future growth in access to agents. This holds both for (i) socioeconomic variables that we collected in 2008 (although we do not include consumption, which could have been affected in the short run by M-PESA, which was launched more than a year before our first survey) as reported in table S2, and (ii) measures of food consumption in 2007 from the same data set that we used for the falsification tests in (9), reported in table S3.
Fig. 1. Change in log(per capita consumption) by gender, for households with and without improvements in agent access.
Because gender could be correlated with other characteristics Zjj that allowed individuals and households to benefit from access to mobile money, we include additional interaction terms of the form DAij x Zij in the regression above. For the individual-level regressions, we include education, and for household level regressions, we add education, wealth, and bank account ownership (education and wealth are dummy variables for whether the household is below the median value in the sample and we use a dummy for the household being unbanked, all measured in 2008). If, as a result of including these interactions, the coefficient 5 were no longer significant, we would infer that the gender effect was driven by these other characteristics. From this specification, we report the effect of changes in agent density for females, over and above the effects associated with Zjj (i.e., the sum of the main effect of agents and the female interaction).
Summary statistics of interest are reported in table S1. Mean daily per capita consumption was 208 Kenyan shillings (SD = 301), or a little over $2.50 at the prevailing nominal exchange rate at the time of the 2014 survey. We estimate that 43.3% of our sample had per capita consumption less than $1.25 per day (a common measure of extreme poverty), and that for 66.0% it was less than $2 per day. Among household heads in the sample, 24.6% reported "farming ' as their primary occupation, and 17.5% said they ran a business. On average, in 41.2% of households, at least one person in the household had migrated either temporarily or permanently since 2008.
headed households that experienced a change in agent access at the third quartile of the distribution, versus those at the first quartile. In terms of agent density, this is a move from zero agents within 1 km of the household to six agents. We refer to this measure as the interquartile impact.
Finally, allowing for interactions between changes in agent density and other observable household characteristics has no impact on our results (see tables S4 to S6 for complete results). Exactly what it might be about female headed-ness that yields these large impacts on consumption and poverty is discussed below.
Table 1. Consumption and poverty. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the location level. *P < 0.1, **P < 0.05, ***P < 0.01. All specifications include location fixed effects and controls for gender, age, and age squared of the household head. All measurements are from 2008; complete estimates are shown in tables S4 to S6.
The higher consumption levels we observed could be driven by increased labor or capital income, or simply by transfers between individuals with different propensities to consume. In turn, mobile money could have facilitated these changes through a number of channels: as a secure means of storing value, it could increase the return to savings and hence future consumption; it has allowed greater access to credit, both formally (through services such as M-Shwari) and informally, potentially increasing investment in productive assets; it has facilitated informal risk sharing, which, as well as smoothing consumption, could lead households to adopt higher-risk but higher-return income-earning strategies or occupations; by reducing the cost of long-distance remittances, it could allow internal migration of breadwinners to higher-return labor markets; and by making payments easier and safer (including via Lipa na M-PESA), it could have boosted small-scale trade and induced changes in occupational choices. Although we lack definitive evidence on all possible mechanisms, there is some support for the savings and occupational choice channels identified above.
in agent access are associated with changes in household assets (Table 2). Although there is no impact on physical asset holdings, we do measure a change in the log of total financial savings (including self-reported cash plus balances in bank accounts, savings clubs [savings and credit cooperatives (SACCOs) or rotating savings and credit associations (ROSCAs)], and mobile money accounts, as reported in column 2. The interquartile impact on financial savings of femaleheaded households is 22.3%.
Overall, attrition from our original non-Nairobi sample between 2008 and 2014 was 35% (18). To establish the robustness of our conclusions, we report two additional tests in tables S7 to S12 that show our results are not materially affected (see supplementary text). First, we restricted our analysis to the subsample of 50.4% of households in villages in which attrition was less than 35%, a subsample in which the attrition rate was only 17% after 6 years. Tables S7, S9, and S11 show these results, which are consistent with those in Tables 1 to 3. Second, we reweighted the data for attrition using the methods of (19). These results are reported in tables S8, S10, and S12, again consistent with our main findings. Looking across all these attrition checks, the results for consumption and poverty are robust, especially for female-headed households. The results for the overall sample on savings and bank accounts are also robust, as are the results on occupational choice. However, the results for household size are not robust to these checks. Finally, we find that attrition is largely uncorrelated with the independent variable of interest, changes in agent density, especially in locations with low attrition (see supplementary text).
In contrast, more basic financial services such as the ability to safely store, send, and transact moneytaken for granted in most advanced economies, and which in the form of mobile money have reached millions of Kenyans at unprecedented speed over the past decadeappear to have the potential to directly boost economic well-being. We have shown that access to mobile money has lifted as many as 194,000 households out of poverty, and has been effective in improving the economic lives of poor women and of members of female-headed households. Our evidence, and earlier work, suggests that these impacts derive from a more efficient allocation of labor, savings, and risk. On the other hand, we do not find any evidence that mobile money increased the overall safety and convenience of households' store of value. Although providing external sources of capital to such populations could, of course, have even larger impacts, our results suggest that having a private, low-cost means of managing financial resources is also necessary and can itself meaningfully reduce poverty rates among vulnerable groups. For women, the route out of poverty might not be more capital, but rather financial inclusion at a more basic level, which enhances their ability to manage those financial resources that are already accessible. Thus, although mobile phone use correlates well with economic development (28-31), mobile money causes it.
1. Two large mobile network operators, Vodacom and MTN, recently shut down their mobile money services in South Africa because of high operating costs and a high prevalence of bank accounts. See the relevant press articles at www.fin24.com/ Tech/Companies/why-vodacom-m-pesa-has-flopped-in-sa-20160509 and www.businessdailyafrica.com/Corporate-News/ MTN-scraps-mobile-money-business-in-South-Africa/539550-3382710-13vftp7z/.
12. About 1027 households are covered in all five rounds, but (excluding 2011) 1299 households are covered in the four rounds.
18. Over such a long panel in this kind of environment, this rate of attrition is not unusually high. For example, see footnote 19 in (9), which provides a list of studies that have comparable attrition rates.
22. B. Crepon, F. Devoto, E. Duflo, W. Pariente, Am. Econ. J. Appl. Econ. 7, 123-150 (2015).
We thank S. Asman and G. Ramani for management of the 2014 data collection, and Financial Sector Deepening Kenya and the Gates Foundation for financial support for the data collection. The study received institutional review board approval from the MIT Committee on Use of Humans as Experimental Subjects, IRB 1403006291. T.S. is on the board of directors of Innovations for Poverty Action, which participated in some of the rounds of data collection. The DOI for round 5 of the data is 10.7910/DVN/L1DVIH (https://dataverse. harvard.edu/dataverse/mobilemoney).
Science (print ISSN 0036-8075; online ISSN 1095-9203) is published weekly, except the last week in December, by the American Association for the Advancement of Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. Copyright 2016 by the American Association for the Advancement of Science; all rights reserved. The title Science is a registered trademark of AAAS.