Development organizations also have embraced technology's potential to reduce poverty; the World Bank argues that smartphones with data connectivity "not only empower individuals but have important cascade effects stimulating growth, entrepreneurship, and productivity throughout the economy as a whole."1 Both private-sector and development organizations thus share a common belief that access is the key to unlocking technology's full potential to contribute to economic growth.
However, the function and effects of the mobile phone as a media device are the most significant aspects of the technology in terms of social change. Tomi Ahonen, a mobile industry analyst, terms the technology "the seventh mass media," and it is increasingly apparent that mobile media are characterized by social networking and the consumption of entertainment content.7 There is a wealth of studies that describe mass media and entertainment as contributing to the globalization of Western values such as autonomy and individualism, from contributing to the overthrow of communism to introducing the concepts of rationalism and positivism.8 Recent studies have examined how television affects social values in developing countries; Robert Jensen and Emily Oster's study, for example, finds a correlation between access to cable television and marked increases in women's autonomy, which decreases the acceptability of wife-beating as well as preference for sons. The effects of access to cable television, they argue, are on a par with the effects five years of education or moving to an urban environment can have.
assuming that Western values and lifestyles are superior and the only true form of modernity, the idea that culture is significant is again the subject of attention within development circles.
Although the idea of technology as an amplifier of human intent is so com-monsense that it's a National Rifle Association motto"It's not guns who kill people, people do"it has received limited attention from scholars of information technology and development, although studies in areas that inform development theory do examine amplificatory trends. For example, some studies examine the effects cable television and social media have on political and social attitudes, finding that the design of technologies and the choices people make can amplify existing values.
Driven by the economics of user attention, social media sites selectively filter stories, posts, and information to maximize user attentiona process that provides content that confirms what people already believe. Pariser popularized the concept of the "filter bubble" to describe how the design of algorithms and recommendation engines that underpin social media sites are oriented toward providing content that people enjoy consuming, which tends to affirm their existing attitudes.23 Indeed, Facebook recently carried out a controversial study to determine how to influence users' emotions most effectively. The study found that people's emotions were amplified by the content they consumed, a phenomenon known as emotional contagion.
The Pew Research Center's recent study on public discussion of the Edward Snowden case, in which he leaked details of the U.S. National Security Agency's (NSA) public surveillance program, highlights how social media might limit diverse debate. The study finds that, "if people thought their friends and followers in social media disagreed with them, they were less likely to say they would state their views on the Snowden-NSA story."27 The study also warns that this "spiral of silence" might spread offline, as it has found that the average Facebook user is "half as likely to talk about Snowden-NSA issues at a physical public meeting than a non-Facebook user."28 This could have implications for public debate and diversity of opinion in public life.
This is precisely what may happen if the focus is only on increasing mobile Internet access. Toyama argues that, "short of dramatic co-investments in building human and institutional intent and capacity, mobile phones will only amplify existing forces, and continue to privilege richer and more powerful individuals, communities, and nations."29 Focusing on access to technology without attending to the capability and motivation to use it will not address the foundations of global poverty.
tion of poverty and inequality, and must strengthen existing change agents' ability to use technology to amplify their efforts. In Toyama's words, technology "is best employed as support and amplifier."33 An existing body of theory and work already employs this approach. Communication theorists Srinivas Melkote and H. L. Steeves distinguish a communications for development approach from four other common approaches to using communications for development: the Communication Effects Approach, the Mass Media and Modernization Approach, the Diffusion of Innovations Approach, and the Social Marketing Approach.34 These four are characterized by a top-down approach to communication in which experts share specific information with the "information poor " to bring about specific changes the former have identified as being for the benefit of the latter. Melkote and Steeves argue instead for a communications approach characterized by engaging the poor and empowering them to achieve the kinds of changes they themselves value.35 The individualized and networked nature of mobile Internet, even more than the mass media referred to by Melkote and Steeves, offers opportunities for people to participate and strengthen their ability to achieve change.
The communication for development approach is not just theory. It has a demonstrated track record of successful interventions, which efforts to use the mobile Internet for development could learn from.
tions in the developed world also are building change agents' ability to use digital technologies: Witness, a human rights organization founded by Peter Gabriel, provides video and technology training to human rights activists to help strengthen their work. Tactical Tech, a Berlin-based capacity-building organization, targets active change agents and empowers them to use information and communications in ongoing projects and tailored technology-training programs.
In today's networked world, the potential to forge alliances that are wide and deep is immense, but we must leave behind approaches that focus only on access and recognize that they tend to amplify the status quo, rather than to disrupt inequality and power. Technology alone cannot disrupt poverty or promote equitable changeindeed, left to market forces, it is likely to do the opposite. The mobile Internet can be harnessed most effectively by those who have that capacity and are already on the upper slopes of the socioeconomic pyramid. We need to invest in building the capacity of those at the base of the pyramid and seek out change agents who are already working to alleviate poverty and inequality.
Hatt, Tim, Corina Gardner, Adam Wills, and Martin Harris. Scaling Mobile for Development. GSMA Intelligence. London, UK.: GSMA Mobile for Development Impact, August 2013. https://gsmaintelligence.com/files/analysis/?file=130828-scaling-mobile.pdf.
Hutchinson, Paul, Jennifer Wheeler, Eva Silvestre, Dominique Meekers, Philip Anglewicz, John Hembling, Evan Cole, and Joe Keating. External Evaluation of the Southern African Regional Social and Behaviour Change Communication Programme. Tulane University School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine, August 2012. https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/sys-tem/uploads/attachment_data/file/303482/Southern-African-Regional-Social-Behaviour-Change-Programme.pdf.
Katz, James E., and Mark Aakhus. Perpetual Contact: Mobile Communication, Private Talk, Public Performance. Cambridge University Press, 2002.
Martin, M. (2012, February 20). Less than 10% of the Web in 2012 is mobile ready. Search Engine Land. Retrieved December 23, 2012, from: http://searchengineland.com/less-than-10-of-the-web-in-2012-is-mobile-ready-112101.
Opera Software, Opera Mini: Opera Use and User Behaviour White Paper. Opera/On Device Research White Paper. Oslo, Norway: Opera, 2012.
Woolcock, Michael. Culture, Politics, and Development. SSRN Scholarly Paper. Rochester, NY: Social Science Research Network, June 1, 2014. http://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=2458727.
2. Robert Jensen, "The Digital Provide: Information (technology), Market Performance, and Welfare in the South Indian Fisheries Sector," The Quarterly Journal of Economics 122, no. 3 (2007): 879-924.
4. Vicente L. Rafael, "The Cell Phone and the Crowd: Messianic Politics in the Contemporary Philippines," Philippine Political Science Journal 24, no. 47 (2003): 3-36.
10. Nathalie Hyde-Clarke and Tamsin Van Tonder, "Revisiting the 'Leapfrog' Debate in Light of Current Trends of Mobile Phone Internet Usage in the Greater Johannesburg Area, South Africa," Journal of African Media Studies 3, no. 2 (2011): 263-276.
12. Philip M. Napoli, and Jonathan Obar, Mobile Leapfrogging and Digital Divide Policy: Assessing the Limitations of Mobile Internet Access. Washington DC: New America Foundation, 2013; 12.
16. Daniel Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow (reprint ed.). New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2013; Joseph Henrich, Steven J. Heine, and Ara Norenzayan, "The Weirdest People in the World?" Behavioral and Brain Sciences 33, nos. 2-3 (2010): 61-83.
17. Ann Swidler, "Culture in Action: Symbols and Strategies," American Sociological Review 51, no. 2 (April 1986): 273-86. doi:10.2307/2095521.
25. W. Lance Bennett and Shanto Iyengar, "A New Era of Minimal Effects? The Changing Foundations of Political Communication," Journal of Communication 58, no. 4 (December 2008): 707-31; Michael Conover, Jacob Ratkiewicz, Matthew Francisco, Bruno Gonsalves, Filippo Menczer, and Alessandro Flammini, "Political Polarization on Twitter," In ICWSM, 2011; Cass R. Sunstein, Going to Extremes: How Like Minds Unite and Divide. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press, 2009.
27. Pew Research Center, "Social Media and the 'Spiral of Silence.'" Pew Research Center's Internet & American Life Project, August 26, 2014. Available at http://www.pewinternet.org/2014/08/26/social-media-and-the-spiral-of-silence/.
31. Amartya Sen, Development as Freedom (Vol. 2). Oxford, England: Oxford University Press, 1999. Available at http://www.amazon.ca/dp/0385720270.