The GSMA Mobile for Development team1 was delighted when Omidyar Network, a leading social investor, told us it wanted to increase its investment in developing world mobile technologies and asked for assistance in understanding the landscape of innovative products, services, and platforms. Organizations working in this area frequently talk in terms of sectors or "verticals"for example, agriculture or healthcarebut, like most technology investors, Omidyar Network thinks horizontally and looks for versatile technology platforms that can scale to meet a wide range of user needs. The resulting research project forced the GSMA to take a different perspective, one that has changed the way it looks at mobile initiatives in the developing world and has helped guide the formation of a newly launched Mobile and Development Intelligence program.2 Through an online community, this program aims to map out a complete landscape of developing world mobile products and services, and to provide free access to a wide range of market data and analysis.
Christopher Williamson is an Advisor to the GSMA Mobile and Development Intelligence Programme where he provides support across all workstreams as well as helping to develop a new focus area on mobile entrepreneurs and investors. Prior to this role he played multiple roles in the mobile industry in both developed and developing world markets with companies such as Everything Everywhere, Psitek, L.E.K. Consulting, and Ofcom.
aim was to get a full picture of the projects currently in operation beyond just the most talked-about sectors and initiatives, and to understand the true scope of innovation by uncovering patterns in the needs addressed and the nature of the mobile products and services being deployed. This framework was used to map out horizontal and vertical patterns of innovation and to look at the potential to generate revenue and, hence, to achieve financial sustainability. The findings and resulting recommendations are described below.
This explosion in mobile access has given rise to an incredible breadth of innovation in the developing world. Much of it is commercially driven, but there is also a huge number of nonprofit and government initiatives as well as social ventures with both financial and social objectives. The projects in this sample originated in 40 countries and covered every continent.6 As the innovative use of mobile continues to expand globally, a few hotspots are emergingfor example, India, the U.S., Kenya, and South Africa. While some products and services are developed in one country and deployed in others, there is an increasing pattern of locally developed solutions that support local needs.
Looking across the 300-plus products and services sampled for this research, 40 distinct "use cases" emerged relative to the problem or need being addressed. Although there may be some overlap, these use cases can be grouped reasonably easily into seven distinct areas of need or verticals (see Table 2, following page). Many of these verticals are already represented by established donor programs, conference themes, and industry language and areas of expertise.
The primary challenge in taking this kind of perspective is one of simplifying complexity. Mobile innovation can occur across three different technology layers; at a network, device, and application level. Within each of these layers, services often use a range of technologies in parallel. A service using one-way SMS messages to deliver information to a large audience on a basic handset works very differently than a service using SMS messages to deliver peer-to-peer social networking to the same group of users. On the other hand, mobile payment platforms using USSD authentication have a lot in common with other payment platforms using SMS authentication.
The first seven product and service typesthe "Application level"cover services and applications delivered via mobile handsets. This is where most of the best-known "mobile for development" initiatives fall. All of these product and service types are already commonly used terms. However, grouping them together highlights their distinctive characteristics and provides a more complete horizontal perspective on how mobile technology is being leveraged in the developing worldwithout getting stuck in too much technical complexity. As shown in the text box "Service Mapping Examples," it is possible to take horizontal or vertical approaches to service delivery at the application level.
Horizontal approach: Mobenzi Researcher is a data-collection tool designed for fieldworkers to gather various types of information (cross-sector). It works with feature phones and smartphones, and allows mobile surveys to be designed and deployed through a web portal. Surveys can include multiple-choice data, free text, images, and GPS coordinates.
Although most initiatives could be mapped clearly to a single sector, some projects are mapped against multiple sectors and are therefore counted more than once on the "heat map" shown in Figure 4. However, other projects were not designed with any specific sector in mind; they were mapped separately as having a "Cross-sector" focus. While the vast majority of projects clearly mapped to a single product or service type, some used different product and service types in tandem. In such cases, each component was mapped separately. This approach was used to create the innovation "heat map" shown in Table 4.
Nearly all the types of products and services have use cases within a broad range of sectors. This indicates strong technology and platform commonalities between vertically focused program areas and highlights the potential risk of multiplicity and reinvention of the same tools. For example, some of the sophisticated interactive content platforms that have been developed with healthcare use cases in mind could be reused to facilitate learning, agriculture, or micro-entrepreneurship.
Interactive content services have been a huge innovation area across the developing world. These services bring a key element of Internet access-automated access to previously created content-to populations without access to computers. The full spectrum of mobile access technologies have been used here (see Figure 6); for users with low-end handsets, a wide range of IVR, SMS, and USSD-based services have been developed. They can be accessed from the most basic handsets and will continue to play a key role among rural populations. There are more options for feature phone and smartphone users; an enormous range of mobile websites and apps are now available that focus on, and increasingly produced by, developing world users.
whereas others are designed for trained fieldworkers with smartphones. However, much of the functionality required across verticals is very similarthe ability to capture data in the form of free text, multiple-choice questions, or even photos, videos, or GPS coordinates.
In addition to global social networks like Facebook, which is used by hundreds of millions in the developing world, a number of interesting peer-to-peer platforms have also emerged that are specific to the developing world. As in the developed world, there is likely to be an increasing shift from centrally generated, interactive content toward user-generated, peer-to-peer content. These services fall into two main categories. The first category within peer-to-peer is posting platforms; at present, these are typically used for buying and selling goods (for example, Esoko,23 an information platform primarily used for market pricing), or posting jobs (for example, Souktel Jobmatch24), and have been designed for a wide range of handset types. The second category is social networks for users for whom the mainstream social networks may be out of reach; for example, social networks designed specifically for basic handsets (for example, Safaricom Semeni25), and even voice-based social networks (for example, Freedom Fone26) for users with low literacy levels.
Inventory management tools are geared toward using mobile technology to optimize supply chains for developing world consumers. A handful of these projects emerged in this sample, with pioneers such as Sproxil,27 Logistimo,28 and Frogtek29 creating innovative services for shopkeepers, suppliers, and governments. These tools can be used to track, manage, validate, and order inventory. There will likely be a rising number and scale of inventory management services, given that many of these tools use smartphones, which will become increasingly accessible in urban areas.
There is less activity with niche devices, probably due to the higher capital investment costs associated with developing mobile hardware. However, some of the innovations in this area, such as supervised mobile payphones (for example, Psitek's Jembi phone30) and airtime vending devices, have been widely adopted. At the moment, there are some particularly interesting use cases in healthcare, such as EyeNetra, a smartphone clip-on combined with an app and cloud-based platform that allows eye examinations to be conducted quickly and cost-effectively in the field.
In addition to providing insights around patterns of innovation, this systematic framework can also help provide a better understanding of the potential for longterm financial sustainability and how this currently relates to different horizontals and verticals.
The results are shown in Table 5 (following page), which shows the proportion of products and services that generated some kind of revenue stream across each vertical and horizontal.
For other sectors there is a more even mix of revenue-generating and non-revenue-generating projects. Overall, 69 percent of all the projects included in this research had some kind of revenue stream (or 53 percent, if excluding "Financial inclusion" as a sector).
 Many initiatives that are cross-sector in nature already take a horizontal view. This may be driven by a desire to make the most of a strong technology platform across different types of users, or by a desire to meet the holistic needs of existing users through a diverse range of services delivered through a common platform. There is a risk that these kinds of initiatives may be overlooked by research or cannot be funded by existing vertically focused programs and funding structures.
This research laid the groundwork for a new and broader GSMA program called Mobile and Development Intelligence (MDI). Funded by Omidyar Network, MDI offers data, analysis, and user-generated content to support business decisions and to clarify the evidence of socioeconomic impact of the mobile industry in the developing world. MDI is free to use and has been designed with a broad range of stakeholders in mind.
 The most successful vertical initiatives often use a number of complementary product or service types in tandem so as to reach a broader range of users and to drive a deeper level of user engagementfor example, IKSL. This approach can both broaden and deepen the social impact of these initiatives.
 However, some sectors and types of products or services seem easier to monetize than others. Services that are most closely linked to users' livelihoods and financial needs seem to have the highest potential for generating revenue.
 Sharing of knowledge and best practice. Where existing platforms can't be reused or adapted, they can be learned from; a horizontal perspective gives innovators a wider view of what has or has not worked elsewhere. While collaborative approaches and standardization of technology can be difficult to manage, the resulting benefits and increased scalability can be extremely attractive.
 Product and service types as a toolkit. These can be thought of as a toolkit; many projects actually use multiple product and service types and access technologies to fulfill a specific set of linked, vertical user needs. Promoting awareness of these different product and service types could stimulate real service innovation, thereby solving problems at multiple levels via different kinds of user interaction.
 Increased development costs, reduced success rates, lower social impact and financial returns. Trying to solve problems without an awareness of how these have been addressed elsewhere increases the risk of failure and leads to diminished financial and social returns on investment. It might take longer up front to research existing solutions and platforms thoroughly, but doing this will inevitably pay off later in the rollout.
 When funding technology solutions, consider allocating funds horizontally as well as vertically, or pooling initiatives from a number of different vertical programs.
 Engage in collaboration and open dialogue to create platforms and technology standards and build innovation ecosystems.
 Take time to thoroughly research existing products, services, and platforms before building anything new from scratch. Leverage other organizations' successes, learn from their failures, and avoid surprise competition later on.
 Think carefully about the tradeoffs between device capabilities and reach; high-end and low-end solutions both have their place. Indicators such as literacy rates, interoperability across MNOs, and/or mobile money adoption rates may all have an impact on which access technology is most appropriate to deploy in a given market.
 Start with a tight focus, but consider horizontal broadening as well as geographic expansion to achieve scale.
if mobile solutions are developed from a narrow, sector-specific point of view, they may miss the opportunity to reach the full scale of end users who could benefit from the same solution.
However, to realize this potential, mobile solutions to development problems need to be created with the horizontal perspective of technology markets, not only vertically, as is the established paradigm within the development community. Mobile technology doesn't only provide unparalleled access to developing world users; it also opens up new approaches to how innovation can happen. Unlike earmarked donor funds, technology knows no geographic borders, doesn't favor one group of users over another, and thinks first about the potential to scale. Applying a systematic horizontal and vertical perspective will strengthen our understanding and ultimately unlock the benefits of mobile technology to meet the needs of more people worldwide.
This research is based on a broad landscape analysis of over three hundred products and services using mobile in the developing world, undertaken by the GSMA in 2011-2012.
The GSMA's extensive knowledge and contact network in this sphere were used to define this sample, along with desk research of existing relevant databases and websites, donors' and investors' lists of recipients, company websites, press and social media coverage. Although there is a large and growing volume of innovation in this space, much remains below the radar of press and social media coverage. It is therefore impossible to form a truly comprehensive view of relevant organizations. However, while the sample has been increased substantially since this project was initially carried out, the overall picture and patterns have been consistent.
Gib Bulloch, "The Case for Public Private Partnerships for Sustainable Development," Business Week, 2012. Available at http://www.businessweek.com/articles/2012-06-22/the-case-for-private-partnerships-for-sustainable-development.