
















































Demographics and robots


Demographics and Automation∗

Daron Acemoglu

MIT

Pascual Restrepo

Boston University

October 2017.

Abstract

We argue theoretically and document empirically that aging leads to greater (industrial)

automation, and in particular, to more intensive use and development of robots. Using US data,

we document that robots substitute for middle-aged workers (those between the ages of 36 and

55). We then show that demographic change—corresponding to an increasing ratio of senior

to middle-aged workers—is associated with pronounced increases in the adoption of robots and

other automation technologies across countries and with more robot-related activities in US

commuting zones. We provide a directed technological change model that explains not only

these main effects of aging, but also predicts that these responses should be more pronounced in

industries that rely more on middle-aged workers and those that present greater opportunities

for automation. Both of these predictions receive support from country-industry variation in

the adoption of robots. Our model also implies that the productivity implications of aging are

ambiguous when technology responds to demographic change, but we should expect productivity

to increase relatively in industries that are most amenable to automation, and this is indeed the

pattern we find in the data.

Keywords: aging, automation, demographic change, economic growth, directed technolog-

ical change, productivity, robots, tasks, technology.

JEL Classification: J11, J23, J24, O33, O47, O57.

Work in Progress. Comments Welcome.

∗We thank Joonas Tuhkuri and Sean Wang for excellent research assistance, and Google, Microsoft, the Sloan

Foundation and the Toulouse Network on Information Technology for support.



1 Introduction

Advances in automation and robotics technology are poised to transform many aspects of the

production process (e.g., Brynjolfsson and McAfee, 2012, Akst, 2014, Autor, 2015, Ford, 2016),

and have already made important inroads in modern manufacturing (e.g., Graetz and Michaels,

2015, Acemoglu and Restrepo, 2017a). But there are major differences in how rapidly these

technologies are spreading across countries. For example, the number of (industrial) robots

per thousand workers in US manufacturing stands at 9.14 in 2014, while the same number is

considerably higher in Japan (14.20), Germany (16.95) and South Korea (20.14). Similarly,

the United States lags behind Germany and Japan in the production of robots—a single major

producer of industrial robots is headquartered in the United States, compared to six in each

of Germany and Japan (Leigh and Kraft, 2017). These differences in robotics are not only

notable given the central role that this and other automation technologies might play in the

next several decades, but they may also be related to a puzzling fact noted in Acemoglu and

Restrepo (2017b): despite the potential negative effects of aging on productivity and output,

there is no negative relationship between age and in GDP growth across countries.

In this paper, we advance the hypothesis that cross-country differences in automation are

at least in part explained by differential demographic trends, and emphasize the productivity

implications of the changes in automation induced by demographic trends. Focusing again

on robotics where we have access to comparable data, the United States, and to some degree

the United Kingdom, are lagging behind in robotics because they are not aging as rapidly

as Germany, Japan and South Korea. This is not because of differential demand for robots

and automation in the service sector in countries undergoing rapid aging—our focus is on the

manufacturing sector. Rather, we document that this pattern reflects the response of firms to

the relative scarcity of middle-aged workers, who appear to be most substitutable for robots.

We start with a simple model of directed technology adoption. Two types of workers,

“middle-aged” and “senior,” are allocated across different tasks and industries. Middle-aged

workers have a comparative advantage in production tasks, while senior workers specialize in

nonproduction services. The importance of production tasks relative to nonproduction services

varies across industries. Firms can also automate production and substitute machines for labor

in production tasks.

Crucially, in our model technology is endogenous: firms can invest to automate additional

tasks in their industry or to increase the productivity of middle-aged workers. Using this frame-

work, we show that a demographic change that reduces the ratio of middle-aged to senior

workers induces the adoption of additional automation technologies. This effect is particularly

pronounced in industries that rely more on middle-aged workers and those that have greater op-

portunities for automation. The productivity implications of demographic change, on the other

hand, are ambiguous: first, demographic change affects output per worker given technology—

1



and this effect tends to be negative when the wage of middle-aged workers is greater than that

of older workers. Second, the induced adoption of robotics technology enables the substitution

of cheaper machines for labor, increasing productivity. Third and counteracting this, greater

investment in robotics may come at the cost of other technological investments, thus creating

another drag on overall productivity.

The bulk of the paper investigates these issues empirically, focusing on industrial robots as

well as a few other automation technologies. Our results point to a strong correlation between

aging and the adoption of robotics and other automation technologies. We start with suggestive

evidence on the substitutability between robots and workers of different ages.1 First, we look

at the age composition of employment in highly-robotized industries, which shows that workers

between the ages of 31 and 55 are more likely to be employed in highly-robotized industries than

in other industries. Second, we use the same strategy as in Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017a),

exploiting differences in the exposure to robots across US commuting zones, but focusing on the

effects of this exposure on workers of different age groups (rather than on overall employment

and wages). We find that the negative effects of exposure to robots fall on the employment and

earnings of workers (and men) between the ages of 36 and 55. These two pieces of evidence

support our working hypothesis for the rest of the paper—that robots are more substitutable

for middle-aged workers than older workers.

We then use country-level data on the stock of robots per thousand worker between 1993

and 2015 from that International Federation of Robotics (IFR) to investigate the effects of

changing age composition of the workforce. Our main specifications focus on long-differences,

where our left-hand side variable is the change in the number of robots per thousand workers

between 1993 and 2014. Our results indicate that countries undergoing more rapid aging—

measured as an increase in the ratio of workers above 56 to those between 26 and 55—are

investing significantly more in robotics.2 The effects we estimate are quantitatively large. Aging

alone explains close to 40% of the cross-country variation in the adoption of industrial robots.

Moreover, a 10 percentage points increase in our aging variable is associated with 0.9 more

robots per thousand manufacturing workers—compared to the average increase of 3 robots

per thousand manufacturing workers observed during this period. This estimated magnitude

suggests, for instance, that if the United States had the same demographic trends as Germany,

the gap in robotics between the two countries would be 25 percent smaller.

These results are robust to a range of controls allowing for differential trends across countries

in investment in robotics. For example, they are virtually unchanged when we control for

differential trends by initial GDP per capita, population level, robot density, capital output ratio,

1Though our focus is on automation more broadly, in most of our empirical work we use information on robots

both because robotics is a particularly important type of automation technology, and also because the adoption

of robots can be measured in a more consistent manner across countries and industries than other automation

technologies.
2We verify that our results are not sensitive to the exact age cutoffs we use.

2



various human capital variables, wage levels, and unionization rates. Because age composition

is potentially endogenous due to in- and out-migration from a country, which are likely to be

correlated with economic trends, we verify our baseline results using an instrumental-variables

(IV) strategy exploiting sizes of past birth cohorts. These estimates are very similar to the

ordinary least squares (OLS) estimates. We also confirm these results using an alternative

estimate of investment in robotics: imports of industrial robots computed from bilateral trade

data. Though imports of robots are not a reliable measure of investments in robotics technology

for countries that house major robots producers (in particular, Germany, Japan and Korea),

this measure is highly correlated with our IFR measure, and confirms our results on the effects

of demographics on the adoption of robotics technology.

The effect of demographic change on technology are not confined to robotics. Using bilateral

trade data, we also show a similar relationship between aging and a number of other automation

technologies (such as numerically controlled machines, weaving and knitting machines, vending

machines and ATMs), and also verify that there is no such relationship for technologies that

appear more broadly labor-augmenting (such as general equipment and various tools).

We also estimate the effects of aging on the adoption of robots at the commuting zone level

in the United States. Though we do not have measures of investments in robots for commuting

zones, we use Leigh and Kraft’s (2016) measure of the number of integrators in an area as a

proxy for robots-related activity (as we also did in Acemoglu and Restrepo, 2017a). Since these

integrators are tasked with installation, reprogramming and maintenance of industrial robots,

their presence is highly indicative of significant installation of robots in the area. Using this

measure, we confirm the relationship between demographic change and the adoption of robots.3

As noted above, a sharper prediction of the directed technological change approach to au-

tomation is that the effects of demographic change should be particularly pronounced in in-

dustries that rely more on middle-aged workers (and also in industries that present greater

opportunities for automation or robotics). Using the industry-level breakdown of investment

in robots and robot per thousand workers in the IFR, we investigate these predictions as well,

and find fairly robust support for them. Aging has little impact on robot adoption in industries

that rely least in middle-aged workers, and a much stronger impact on industries that are most

reliant on middle-aged workers.

Finally, we investigate the implications of demographic change on labor productivity. Our

results here establish a positive impact of demographic change on labor productivity in industries

that are most amenable to automation. This result is consistent with our theoretical predictions

and also illustrates the critical role that automation technologies may be playing in an economy’s

adjustment to demographic change. Indeed, the lack of a negative relationship between aging

3Probably reflecting the endogeneity of the demographic structure of a commuting zone within the United

States, these results are significant only with our IV estimates, which focus on demographic differences across

commuting zones due to sizes of past birth cohorts.

3



and GDP mentioned above might be partly due to the more rapid adoption of automation

technologies in countries undergoing significant demographic change—a pattern consistent with

our theoretical and empirical results.

Overall, though the estimates presented in this paper do not necessarily correspond to causal

effects—since demographic change could have other impacts on technology adoption, or despite

our focus on changes coming from the relative sizes of past birth cohorts, it might be correlated

with other trends—the correlations we document are very robust and highly suggestive. We

find it reassuring too that differences in investments in robots are not explained by any of the

secular trends we are controlling for, and as already noted above, they are unlikely to reflect

changing demand for the types of products or services in an aging society (such as increased

demand for health care), because we are focusing on the manufacturing sector. They also match

the predictions of our directed technological change framework quite closely.

Our paper is related to a few recent literatures. The first is a literature estimating the

implications of automation technologies on labor market outcomes. Early work in this literature

(e.g., Autor, Levy and Murnane, 2003; Goos and Manning, 2007; Michaels, Natraj and Van

Reenen, 2014; Autor and Dorn, 2013; Gregory, Salomons and Zierahn, 2016) provides evidence

suggesting that automation of routine jobs has been associated with greater wage inequality and

decline of middle-skill occupations. More recently, Graetz and Michaels (2015) and Acemoglu

and Restrepo (2017a) estimate the effects of the adoption of robotics technology on employment

and wages (and in the former case, also on productivity). Our work is complementary to but

quite different from these papers since we focus not on the implications of these technologies,

but on the determinants of their adoption.

Second, a growing literature focuses on the potential costs of demographic change, in some

cases seeing this as a major disruptive factor that will bring slow economic growth (e.g., Hansen,

1938; Gordon, 2016) and potentially other macroeconomic problems such as an aggregate

demand-induced secular stagnation (see, e.g., Summers, 2013, and the essays in Baldwin and

Teulings, 2014).4 We differ from this literature by focusing on the effects of demographic changes

on robots, and more broadly on technology adoption decisions—an issue that does not seem to

have received much attention in this literature.5 A few works focusing on the effects of demo-

graphic change on factor prices (e.g., Poterba, 2001; Krueger, 2004; Krueger and Ludwig, 2007)

and human capital (e.g., Ludwig, Schelkle and Vogel, 2012; Geppert, Ludwig and Abiry, 2016)

are more related, but we are not aware of any papers studying the impact of aging on technology,

except the independent and simultaneous work by Abelianisky and Prettner (2017). There are

4A related literature explores the fiscal costs of demographic change for pensions and Social Security (see De

Nardi et al., 1999; Storesletten 2000; Kotlikoff et al., 2002; Attanasio et al., 2007).
5As mentioned above, our short paper, Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017b), pointed out that despite these con-

cerns, there is no negative relationship between aging and GDP growth, and suggested that this might be because

of the effects of aging on technology adoption, but did not present any evidence on this linkage, nor did it develop

the theoretical implications of demographic change on technology adoption and productivity.

4



several important differences between our work and this paper. These authors focus on the effect

of the slowdown of population growth—rather than age composition—on different types of cap-

ital, one of which corresponds to automation (without any directed technological change). They

also do not consider the industry-level variation (nor do they control for the various competing

economic trends we include in our analysis). We show further that the effects we estimate are

not driven by the level of population or its slower growth, thus distinguishing our results from

theirs. Hence, overall, the two papers are not just independent but also complementary.

Third, our work is related to the literature on technology adoption. Within this literature,

most closely related to our model and conceptual approach is Zeira’s (1998) paper which develops

a model of economic growth based on the substitution of capital for labor, but does not investi-

gate the implications of demographic change on technology adoption. A few recent papers that

study the implications of factor prices on technology adoption are more closely related to our

work. In particular, Manuelli and Seshadri (2010) use a calibrated model to show that stagnant

wages mitigated the adoption of tractors before 1940, while the rapid increase in wages after

1940 accounts for close to 30% of the increase in the adoption of tractors. Clemens et al. (2017)

find that the exclusion of Mexican Braceros—temporary agricultural workers—induced farms

to adopt mechanic harvesters and switch to crops with greater potential for mechanization,

while Lewis (2011) shows that in US metropolitan areas receiving fewer low-skill immigrants

between 1980 and 1990, metal plants adopted more automation technologies. Although the

findings in these papers are consistent with the predictions of our model and our evidence, they

do not investigate the implications of demographic change on technology adoption or robotics

technologies.

Finally, our theoretical and conceptual approach builds on directed technological change

literature (e.g., Acemoglu, 1998, 2002). Our model can be best viewed as a mixture of the

setup in Acemoglu (2007, 2010), which develops a general framework for the study of directed

innovation and technology adoption, with the task-based framework of Acemoglu and Restrepo

(2016), Acemoglu and Autor (2011) and Zeira (1998). One contribution of the theory part of

our paper is to analyze the effects of demographic changes on technology without the specific

functional form restrictions (such as constant elasticity of substitution and factor-augmenting

technologies) as in the early literature or the supermodularity assumptions as in Acemoglu

(2007, 2010). Existing empirical works on directed technological change (e.g., Finkelstein, 2004,

Acemoglu and Linn, 2005, Hanlon, 2016) do not focus on the demographic change. Acemoglu

and Linn (2005) and Costinot, Donaldson and Williams (2017) exploit demographic changes as a

source of variation, but this is in the context of the demand for different types of pharmaceuticals

rather than for technology adoption.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We introduce our model of directed technology

adoption in the next section. Section 3 presents our data sources and some descriptive statis-

tics. Section 4 provides evidence bolstering the case that robotics technology is more highly

5



substitutable to middle-aged workers than older workers. Section 5 presents our cross-country

evidence on the effect of demographic change on the adoption of robots. Much of our analysis

in this section exploits the IFR data, but we also bring other data sources to confirm the effect

of the changing age composition of the workforce on robotics technology. Section 6 investigates

the same relationship across US commuting zones. Section 7 presents evidence that the effects

of demographic change on the adoption of robotics technology is most pronounced in industries

that rely more on middle-aged workers and those with greater opportunities for robotization.

Section 8 considers the relationship between demographic change and the capital-output ratio

and productivity at the industry level. Section 9 concludes, while the Appendix contains proofs

omitted from the text and additional empirical results.

2 Directed Technology Adoption

In this section, we introduce a model of directed technology adoption, which enables us to derive

the main implications of demographic change on the adoption of different types of technologies.

In our model, industries or sectors employ middle-aged workers, senior workers and machines

to perform the tasks necessary for production. Also, technology firms with monopoly power

invest in the development of new technologies that automate tasks or increase the productivity

of middle-aged workers.6

2.1 The Environment

A unique final good Y is produced competitively by combining the output of a continuum of

industries using the following constant elasticity of substitution (CES) aggregate:

Y =

(∫

i∈I
Y (i)

σ−1
σ di

) σ
σ−1

, with σ > 1. (1)

Here Y (i) is the net output of industry i and I denotes the set of industries.7 Throughout, we

choose the final good as the numeraire.

In each industry, (gross) output is produced by combining production tasks, service or sup-

port (nonproduction) tasks, and intermediates that embed technologies:

Y g(i) =
η−η

1− η
[X(i)α(i)S(i)1−α(i)]η[q(θ(i), A(i))]1−η , (2)

6In our model, there is directed technological change (investment by technology monopolists in developing

different types of technologies) and endogenous adoption of these technologies. We emphasize “directed technology

adoption” since our focus is not just on the development but, even more importantly, on the adoption of the

robotics technologies.
7The assumption that σ > 1 is for simplicity. Why we impose this assumption and how it can be relaxed is

explained below when we discuss the incentives of technology monopolists.

6



where X(i) designates the aggregate of production tasks used by industry i, S(i) is the total

amount of labor employed in service tasks, q(θ(i), A(i)) is the quantity of intermediate goods

used by this industry (with θ(i) and A(i) corresponding to the technologies embedded in these

intermediates as we describe below), 1 − η ∈ (0, 1) is the share of intermediates, and finally,

α(i) ∈ (0, 1) designates the importance of production tasks relative to service tasks in the

production function of industry i.8

The aggregate of production tasks, X(i), is produced combining a unit measure of tasks

through another CES aggregator:

X(i) =

(∫ 1

0
X(i, z)

ζ−1
ζ dz

) ζ
ζ−1

,

where ζ is the elasticity of substitution across tasks.

Each task X(i, z) is produced either by labor or machines:

X(i, z) =

{
A(i)l(i, z) +m(i, z) if z ∈ [0, θ(i)]

A(i)l(i, z) if z ∈ (θ(i), 1],

where l(i, z) denotes the amount of production labor employed in task z in industry i, and

m(i, z) denotes machines used in industry i to produce task z. Labor and machines are perfect

substitutes in automated tasks (those with z ≤ θ(i) in industry i). In addition, A(i) corresponds

to labor-augmenting technology, while θ(i) corresponds to the automation technology. In par-

ticular, θ(i) designates the automation threshold in industry i—tasks below this threshold are

automated and can be produced with machines as well as labor. The technological know-how

that enables the automation of additional tasks (as captured by θ(i)) and labor-augmenting

technology (as captured by A(i)) are both embedded in the intermediate goods, which explains

the term q(θ(i), A(i)) in the industry production function (2).

Firms in industry i purchase the intermediates q(θ(i), A(i)) from a technology monopolist

that owns the intellectual property rights over the technology in this industry. We assume that

the technology monopolist supplying industry i can produce its intermediate good by using 1−η

units of the same industry’s output.9 The net output in industry i is obtained by subtracting

the total cost of intermediates, (1− η)q(θ(i), A(i)), from the gross output of the industry:

Y (i) = Y g(i) − (1− η)q(θ(i), A(i)). (3)

There are two types of workers: L middle-aged workers, and S senior workers. The next

assumption specifies the comparative advantage of the two types of workers and ensures that

automation (robots) substitutes for middle-aged workers.

8We assume that supi∈I α(i) < 1 and infi∈I α(i) > 0, so that all (or more appropriately, “almost all”) industries

require both production and service tasks.
9This formulation, linking the cost of intermediates to industry i only to that industry’s output, is convenient,

because it avoids any relative price effects that would have been present if other inputs had been used for producing

intermediates.

7



Assumption 1 1. Each middle-aged worker is endowed with one unit of production labor,

and each senior worker is endowed with one unit of service labor.

2.

ζ > σ.

The first part of this assumption imposes that middle-aged workers fully specialize in pro-

duction tasks, while the second part provides a sufficient condition for machines to be more

substitutable to the middle-aged workers they replace than senior workers.10 Senior workers

fully specialize in service or support tasks, which makes them complements to machines used in

production.

We denote the wage of middle-aged workers by W , the wage of senior workers by V , and

the total supply of machines by M . Market clearing requires the demand for each factor to be

equal to its supply, or more explicitly,

L =Ld =

∫

i∈I

∫ 1

0
l(i, z)dzdi,

M =Md =

∫

i∈I

∫ 1

0
m(i, z)dzdi,

S =Sd =

∫

i∈I
s(i)di,

where the last equality on each line defines the demand for that factor. We assume that machines

are supplied at a fixed rental price P .

2.2 Equilibrium with exogenous technology

Let us denote the set of technologies adopted across all industries by Θ = {A(i), θ(i)}i∈I . We first

characterize equilibria with exogenous technology, where the set of technologies, Θ, is taken as

given. An equilibrium with exogenous technology is defined as an allocation in which all industries

choose the profit-maximizing levels of employment of middle-aged workers, employment of senior

workers, machines and intermediates, all technology monopolists set profit-maximizing prices for

their intermediates, and the markets for middle-aged workers, senior workers and machines clear.

Let PY (i) denote the price of output in industry i, and χ(θ(i), A(i)) be the price of the

intermediate for industry i when this embodies the automation and labor-augmenting technology

pair (θ(i), A(i)). The demand for intermediate goods from industry i is given by

q(θ(i), A(i)) =
1

η
X(i)α(i)S(i)1−α(i)

(
χ(θ(i), A(i))

PY (i)

)− 1
η

. (4)

10Allowing both types of workers to supply both production and service labor would lead to similar results as

long as middle-aged workers have a comparative advantage in production tasks. Our formulation, which can be

viewed as an extreme form of comparative advantage, simplifies the analysis and the exposition.

8



Facing this demand curve with elasticity 1/η and marginal cost of producing intermediates equal

to (1 − η)PY (i), the technology monopolist for industry i will set the profit-maximizing price

to PY (i). Substituting this price into (4), and using (2) and (3), we derive the net output of

industry i as

Y (i) =
2− η

1− η
X(i)α(i)S(i)1−α(i).

Also, the Cobb-Douglas production technology in equation (2) implies that

PY (i) = λ(i)PX (i)
α(i)V 1−α(i), (5)

where λ(i) = (1− η)α(i)−α(i)(1− α(i))α(i)−1, and PX(i) denotes the price of X(i).

We next turn to automation decisions. These decisions will depend on the cost savings from

automation, which in turn are determined by relative factor prices. In particular, let π(i) denote

the cost savings from automation in industry i (meaning the gap between costs when a task is

produced by labor vs. machines). Then,

π(i) =
1

ζ − 1

[(
W

A(i)P

)ζ−1
− 1

]
. (6)

When W
A(i) > P , the effective cost of producing with labor in industry i,

W
A(i) , is greater than the

cost of using a machine, P , and as a result, π(i) > 0 (recall that ζ > 1). The specific functional

form follows from the fact that the elasticity of substitution between tasks is ζ. Conversely,

when W
A(i) < P , it is more expensive to produce with machines in industry i, and if firms in

this industry did so, their costs would go up. Therefore, available automation technologies will

be adopted if π(i) > 0. We can then summarize these automation decisions by defining an

automation threshold, θA(i), which satisfies:

θA(i) =

{
θ(i) if π(i) > 0

0 if π(i) ≤ 0.
(7)

Intuitively, available automation technologies will be adopted as soon as they enable positive cost

savings (where we are assuming without loss of any generality that when indifferent, firms do

not switch to machines). This discussion highlights a general point that plays an important role

for the rest of our analysis— automation becomes more profitable precisely when the effective

wage of middle-aged workers is high.

Using this automation threshold, θA(i), we can now compute the price of X(i) as

PX(i) =

(
θA(i)P 1−ζ + (1− θA(i)(i))

(
W

A(i)

)1−ζ)1−ζ
, (8)

and the share of middle-aged labor in the production of X(i) as:11

sL(i) = (1− θ
A(i))

(
W

A(i)PX (i)

)1−ζ
∈ [0, 1] (9)

11Let L(i) =
∫ 1
0
l(i, s)dsdi and M(i) =

∫ 1
0
m(i, s)dsdi denote the amounts of middle-aged labor and machines

9



Using the above expressions for prices and the share of labor in X(i), we can derive the

demand for factors of production in the economy as:

Ld =
Y

(2− η)W

∫

i∈I
λ(i)1−σPX(i)

α(i)(1−σ)V (1−α(i))(1−σ)α(i)sL(i)di (10)

Md =
Y

(2− η)P

∫

i∈I
λ(i)1−σPX(i)

α(i)(1−σ)V (1−α(i))(1−σ)α(i)(1 − sL(i))di (11)

Sd =
Y

(2− η)V

∫

i∈I
λ(i)1−σPX(i)

α(i)(1−σ)V (1−α(i))(1−σ)(1− α(i))di. (12)

The following proposition shows that an equilibrium with exogenous technology always exists

and is unique, and provides a characterization of the equilibrium level of wages. In what follows,

we let φ = S
L+S denote the share of senior workers in the population, and think of aging as an

increase in φ.

Proposition 1

1. An equilibrium with exogenous technology always exists and is unique. The equilibrium lev-

els of middle-aged and senior wages, W and V , are the unique solutions {WE(φ; Θ), V E(φ,Θ)}

to the system of equations given by: the ideal price index condition,

1 =

(∫

i∈I
λ(i)1−σPX(i)

α(i)(1−σ)V (1−α(i))(1−σ)di

) 1
1−σ

; and (13)

the relative demand for workers,

1− φ

φ
=

V

W

∫
i∈I λ(i)

1−σPX(i)
α(i)(1−σ)V (1−α(i))(1−σ)α(i)sL(i)di∫

i∈I λ(i)
1−σPX(i)α(i)(1−σ)V (1−α(i))(1−σ)(1− α(i))di

(14)

Output and machinery per worker, {yE(φ; Θ),mE(φ,Θ)}, can be then computed using

{WE(φ; Θ),V E(φ,Θ)}.

2. Middle-aged wages WE(φ,Θ) are increasing in φ, and senior wages WE(φ,Θ) are decreas-

ing in φ. On the other hand, φ has an ambiguous impact on output per capita yE(φ,Θ).

Proof. See the Appendix.

Figure 1 depicts the characterization of the equilibrium with exogenous technology. Let

C(W,V, P ) denote the cost of producing one unit of the final good, which is given by the right-

hand side of equation (13). The equilibrium values forWE and V E are then given by the point on

the iso-cost curve C(W,V, P ) = 1—condition (13)—that satisfies CW (W,V,P )
CV (W,V,P )

= 1−φ
φ

—condition

(14).

employed in industry i, respectively. Then total production in industry i can be written as

X(i) =
(
θ
A(i)

1

ζ M(i)
ζ−1
ζ + (1− θA(i))

1

ζ L(i)
ζ−1
ζ

) ζ
ζ−1

(see Acemoglu and Restrepo Amma 2016). Thus as also suggested by (8), an increase in θ(i) (and hence θA(i))

makes the production of X(i) less labor intensive.

10



Figure 1: Equilibrium determination of wages, WE, V E . The downward-slopping curve is the

iso-cost C(W,V, 1) = 1 (condition (13)). The equilibrium is given by the point in this curve at

which CW
CV

= 1−φ
φ

(condition (14)).

Aging—an increase in φ—raisesWE and lowers V E along the convex iso-cost curve C(W,V, P ) =

1, as shown in Figure 1. Proposition 1 also shows that aging has an ambiguous effect on aggregate

otutput per worker. In particular, in the Appendix we show that

1

2− η
yEφ (φ,Θ) = V

E(φ,Θ) −WE(φ,Θ) + P ·mEφ (φ,Θ). (15)

This expression clarifies that the effect of aging on output depends on the wage of middle-aged

workers relative to the wage of senior workers. In particular, if V E < WE, there will be a

negative effect on productivity (though mEφ can be positive, offsetting this effect). Existing

evidence (e.g., Murphy and Welch, 1990) suggests that earnings peak when workers are in their

40s, declining thereafter, which in our model implies V < W , and thus creates a tendency for

aging to reduce productivity. This negative effect echoes the concerns raised by Gordon (2016)

on the potential for slower growth in the next several decades because of demographic change.12

The next proposition shows how demographic change affects automation decisions. For this

proposition and for what follows, it is convenient to denote by I+(φ,Θ) the set of industries for

which π(i) > 0 and new automation technologies are immediately adopted (i.e., θA(i) = θ(i)).

Proposition 2 The set I+(φ,A) satisfies the following properties:

• For φ ≤ φ′ we have I+(φ,Θ) ⊆ I+(φ′,Θ).

12An alternative justification for V E < WE is to relax Assumption 1 and instead assume that middle-aged

workers are endowed with skills to perform both production and service tasks. As workers age, they can no longer

perform the physically more demanding production tasks and must work in service tasks. Then in equilibrium

we would always have V E ≤ WE.

11



• let A = {A(i)}i∈I . There exists a positive threshold φ̃(A) < ∞ (independent of the θ(i)’s),

such that, for φ < φ̃(A), the set I+(φ,Θ) has measure zero. For φ > φ̃(A), the set

I+(φ,Θ) has positive measure.

Proof. See the Appendix.

The proposition shows that aging encourages the adoption of existing automation technolo-

gies. For φ < φ̃(A), there is no adoption of new automation technologies because, given the

state of labor-augmenting technologies, the wage of middle-aged workers is sufficiently low that

automation technologies do not save costs. This threshold, φ̃(A), is independent of the distri-

bution of θ(i)’s across industries, because it demarcates the demographic composition of the

economy such that automation is not profitable in any industry, i.e., W
A(i) ≤ P for all i (and this

is without reference to which tasks are available for automation). When φ > φ̃(A), the wage

(and the effective wage) of middle-aged is sufficiently large that automation becomes cost-saving

and profitable.

What is the effect of automation (when it does take place) on factor prices? As in Acemoglu

and Restrepo (2016), this is determined by two competing forces: a displacement effect—when

automation technologies are adopted, they squeeze middle-aged workers into fewer tasks, re-

ducing the demand for middle-aged labor; a productivity effect—when automation technologies

are adopted, they allow industries to reduce their costs and expand output, raising the demand

for all types of workers. The productivity gains from automation in industry i depend on the

cost-saving gains π(i), introduced in (6). When π(i) is small (but positive), available automation

technologies will be adopted in industry i, generating the displacement effect, but only a minimal

productivity effect. This reasoning implies that there exists a threshold π > 0 such that, when

new automation technologies are introduced in industry i with π(i) ∈ (0, π), the displacement

effect dominates the productivity effect, and automation reduces wages. This result is stated and

some of its implications are developed in the next proposition. In this proposition we consider

marginal changes in automation technologies in a set of industries, denoted by {dθ(i)}i∈I (with

dθ(i) ≥ 0).

Proposition 3

1. Suppose that new automation technologies {dθ(i)}i∈I become available. Then:

• For φ < φ̃(A), these automation technologies are not adopted and there is no impact

on factor prices.

• For φ > φ̃(A), new automation technologies will be adopted in industries in I+(φ,Θ).

If dθ(i) > 0 for a (positive measure) subset of I+(φ,Θ), then these new technolo-

gies increase the wage of senior workers, V ; reduce the relative wage of middle-aged

workers, W/V ; and have an ambiguous effect on the wage of middle-aged workers,

W .

12



• Moreover, there exists a threshold φ(Θ) > φ̃(A) such that, if φ̃(A) < φ < φ(Θ), then

π(i) < π for almost all industries. In this region, if dθ(i) > 0 for a (positive measure)

subset of I+(φ,Θ), the wage of middle-aged workers declines.

2. Consider an improvement in labor-augmenting technologies {dA(i)}i∈I for a set of indus-

tries with positive measure. Then both the middle-aged and senior wages, W and V , and

the relative wage of middle-aged workers, W/V , increase.

Proof. See the Appendix.

Figure 2 illustrates the comparative statics from new automation technologies presented in

part 1 of Proposition 3. The displacement effect corresponds to a clockwise rotation of the

iso-cost curve C(W,V, P ) = 1 around the equilibrium point, reducing W and increasing V . The

productivity effect corresponds to an outward shift of the iso-cost curve, increasing both wages.

The condition π(i) < π for all i ∈ I+ ensures that the shift of the iso-cost is sufficiently small

that the displacement effect dominates the productivity effect. Intuitively, as also emphasized

in Acemoglu and Restrepo (2016), new automation technologies reduce wages precisely when

they generate limited cost savings and productivity effects.

Figure 2: Impact of automation on wages. Automation rotates the iso-cost curve clockwise

(displacement effect) and shifts it outwards (productivity effect).

2.3 Equilibrium with endogenous technology

Our analysis so far took the set of technologies, Θ = {A(i), θ(i)}i∈I , as given. We now endogenize

these technologies using an approach similar to Acemoglu (2007, 2010). We assume that for

industry i, there is a single technology monopolist who can develop new technologies and sell

the intermediates embodying these technologies—the q(A(i), θ(i))’s—to firms in that industry.

13



Developing a technology pair {θ(i), A(i)} costs the monopolists 1−η2−ηY (i)PY (i) · C(θ(i), A(i); i)

units of the final good, where C(.; i) is an increasing and convex function that potentially

varying across industries. The specification imposes that the cost of introducing innovations is

proportional to 1−η2−ηY (i)PY (i), which is adopted to simplify our notation and analysis.

Equation (4) shows that the monopolist in industry i earns profits 1−η2−ηY (i)PY (i). Using

the fact that Y (i) = Y PY (i)
−σ, we can write the net profits from developing the technology

pair {θ(i), A(i)} as 1−η2−ηY PY (i)
1−σ(1 − C(θ(i), A(i); i)). Moreover, because monopolists are in-

finitesimal, they take wages, the price of machinery, and Y as given. Thus, we can write the

profit-maximizing problem of the technology monopolist for industry i in logs as:

max
{θ(i),A(i)}

(1− σ)α(i) ln PX(i) + ln(1− C(θ(i), A(i); i)) (16)

Monopolists have an incentive to invest in automation and labor-augmenting technologies be-

cause these inventions reduce the cost of production PX(i), which in turn reduces PY (i) and

increases their profits.13

To simplify the algebra, we assume that the cost function C(.; i) can be written as

C(θ(i), A(i); i) = 1− (1−G(A(i)))
1

µ(i) (1−H(θ(i)))
1

ρ(i) ,

where G is an increasing and convex function that satisfies G′(0) = 0, limA(i)→∞G(A(i)) = 1

and limA(i)→∞ G
′(A(i)) = ∞. The exponent µ(i) captures the costs of developing new labor-

augmenting technologies in industry i. Likewise H is increasing and convex, and satisfies

H ′(0) = 0, limθ(i)→1 H(θ(i)) = 1 and limθ(i)→1 H
′(θ(i)) = ∞, and the exponent ρ(i) captures

heterogeneity across industries in the technological possibilities for automation. In particular,

industries with a higher ρ(i) face lower marginal costs from automation, and thus have greater

potential for automation. In what follows, we let h(θ) = H
′(θ)

1−H(θ) and g(A) =
G′(A)

1−G(A) . Our

assumptions on H,G imply that g, h are positive and increasing functions.

We can now define an equilibrium with endogenous technology as an equilibrium where tech-

nology choices maximize (16). The equilibrium level of endogenous technology is given by a

fixed point Θ∗ = {θ(i)∗, A(i)∗}i∈I such that

{θ(i)∗, A(i)∗} ∈ argmax
{θ(i),A(i)}

(1− σ)α(i) ln

(
θA(i)P 1−ζ + (1− θA(i))

(
WE(φ,Θ∗)

A(i)

)1−ζ)

+
1

µ(i)
ln(1−G(A(i))) +

1

ρ(i)
ln(1−H(θ(i))) for all i ∈ I. (17)

Equation (17) shows that the equilibrium wage, W = WE(φ,Θ∗), is a sufficient statistic

to determine the optimal choice of technology by monopolists. This observation simplifies the

13This is where our assumption that σ > 1 plays a critical role. When σ ≤ 1, to prevent technology monop-

olists setting infinite markups, we can assume the existence of a fringe of firms that can inefficiently copy new

technologies, forcing the monopolists to set limit prices. All of our results generalize to this case, highlighting

that σ > 1 is adopted for simplicity.

14



characterization of the equilibrium with endogenous technology, as we only need to solve for the

equilibrium wage. Let ΘR(W ) = {AR(W ; i), θR(W ; i)}i∈ I denote the solution to the maximiza-

tion problem in (17) when the equilibrium wage is given by W . An equilibrium wage is then

given by a fixed point of the mapping:

W = WE(φ,ΘR(W )). (18)

Before turning to the fixed-point problem in equation (18), we start by characterizing the

behavior of θR(W, i) and AR(W, i) in the following lemma

Lemma 1

1. The technology choices, θR(W ; i) and AR(W ; i), satisfy the first-order conditions:

h(θR(W ; i)) ≥(σ − 1)α(i)ρ(i)
sL(i)

1 − θ(i)
π(i), (19)

g(AR(W ; i)) ≥(σ − 1)α(i)µ(i)sL(i)
1

AR(W ; i)
. (20)

(19) holds with equality if θR(W ; i) > 0; (20) holds with equality if AR(W ; i) > 0.

2. Let W = WE(φ,Θ∗). The maximization problem in (17) exhibits increasing differences in

W , θ(i) and −A(i). Thus, θR(W ; i) is increasing in W , and AR(W ; i) is decreasing in W .

3. As W → 0 we have that θR(W ; i) = 0 and AR(W ; i) = Ã(i), where

Ã(i)g(Ã(i)) = (σ − 1)α(i)µ(i).

Proof. See the Appendix.

The first part of the lemma provides (necessary) first-order conditions for θR(W ; i) and

AR(W ; i). These conditions reveal that technology monopolists have stronger incentives to

develop automation technologies when the middle-aged wage, W , is high. This is because cost-

saving gains from automation, π(i) ≥ 0, are large when W is high. Conversely, when W is low

and/or middle-aged workers are producing a greater fraction of tasks, technology monopolists

have greater incentives to develop labor-augmenting technologies.

The second part of the lemma establishes a critical supermodularity property, which will

greatly simplify the rest of our analysis of endogenous technology. Namely, the additional au-

tomation induced by a high W further reduces the incentives to invest in labor-augmenting tech-

nologies. The reduction in labor-augmenting technologies in turn further increases the incentives

to invest in automation. Consequently, higher middle-aged wages increase technology monop-

olists’ efforts to automate additional tasks and reduce their investments in labor-augmenting

technologies. This proposition also underscores that the middle-aged wage, W , is the key price

mediating the equilibrium choice of technologies.

15



Finally, the third part of the lemma provides a technical result which we will use in the proof

of the next proposition. More substantively, however, it also implies that as W becomes very

low (and thus cost savings from automation disappear), technology monopolists will not invest

in automation technologies. As a consequence, in an equilibrium with endogenous technology,

we always have θA(i) = θ(i) and all new technologies will be immediately adopted, and thus any

comparative static result that applies to θ(i) also applies to θA(i).

The next proposition establishes the existence of an equilibrium with endogenous technology.

Proposition 4 For any φ ∈ (0, 1), there exists an equilibrium with endogenous technology. In

any such equilibrium the wage, W ∗, satisfies the fixed-point condition in equation (18). For each

fixed point W ∗ there is a uniquely defined set of technology choices given by Θ∗ = ΘR(W ∗).

Proof. See the Appendix.

Suppose first that the mapping WE(φ,ΘR(W )) is decreasing in W .14 In this case, automa-

tion decisions across industries are strategic substitutes and the equilibrium with endogenous

technology is unique as shown in Figure 3.

Figure 3: Wage determination in a scenario with a unique equilibrium. Aging shifts the

mapping WE up, and this increases the equilibrium wage in the unique equilibrium.

In general, WE(φ,ΘR(W )) need not be decreasing in W , and in particular, strong produc-

tivity gains from automation will make the middle-aged wage increasing in automation, creating

14A sufficient condition for this mapping to be decreasing is that the elasticity of the g function, εg, is sufficiently

large in each industry (which guarantees that AR(W, i) is not very responsive to W ), and that φ̃(Ã) < φ <

φ({Ã(i), 0}i∈I) (so that the productivity gains from automation are positive for some industries but still smaller

than π). In this case, the mapping WE(φ,ΘR(W )) is constant for W ≤ W̃ and decreasing for W > W̃ (here, W̃ is

the largest wage such that W̃ < Ã(i)P for almost all i ∈ I). Note also that for φ ≤ φ̃(Ã), the unique equilibrium

involves θ(i)∗ = 0.

16



incentives for further automation in other sectors. Nevertheless, in this case an equilibrium with

endogenous technology still exists, and there are also well-defined least and greatest equilibria

as shown in Figure 4. This is because there is a unique value of the middle-aged wage, W , in

each equilibrium, and technology choices are monotone in W (in view of the supermodularity in

Lemma 1).

Figure 4: Wage determination in a scenario with multiple equilibria. Aging shifts the mapping

WE up, and this increases the equilibrium wage in the least and the greatest equilibrium.

The next proposition studies the implications of aging—an increase in φ—on equilibrium

technology choices.

Proposition 5 In the least and in the greatest equilibrium, an increase in φ—aging—increases

the equilibrium wage W ∗, reduces labor-augmenting technologies, {A(i)∗}i∈I+(φ,Θ∗), increases au-

tomation technologies {θ(i)∗}i∈I+(φ,Θ∗), and expands the set of industries that adopt automation

technologies I+(φ,Θ∗).

This proposition thus provides one of our most important results: aging always encourages

automation, and this is regardless of whether automation has a positive or negative effect on

the middle-aged wage and whether or not there are multiple equilibria (if there are multiple

equilibria, it applies for the relevant equilibria, which are those with the least and greatest values

of the middle-aged wage). Intuitively, machines compete against middle-aged workers, and a

greater scarcity of these workers (relative to senior workers that are complementary to machines)

always increases the relative profitability of using and developing automation technologies. The

proposition also shows that the response of technology is not strong enough to overcome the

initial increase in middle-aged wages brought by aging. This result is also intuitive: if the net

17



effect of aging had been to reduce wages, then firms would not have had incentives to introduce

the new automation technologies in the first place.15

Finally, in the next proposition, we derive how the responsiveness of technologies to aging

varies by industry.

Proposition 6 In the least or the greatest equilibrium, the effect of demographic change on

automation technologies is greater in industries with larger α(i)ρ(i). In particular, if technology

choices are locally differentiable, then

dθ(i)∗

dφ
= Γi

d lnW ∗

dφ
> 0.

for all industries i ∈ I+(φ,A∗), where Γi increases in α(i)ρ(i). Thus, among industries with

the same levels of automation and labor-augmenting technologies, an increase in φ—aging—

has a more pronounced impact on automation in industries that rely more heavily on middle-

aged workers (i.e., those with high α(i) ) and that present greater technological potential for

automation (i.e., those with high ρ(i)).

In our empirical work, we investigate both of the implications of this proposition. Though

the latter—that investments in robotics technology will be more pronounced in industries that

present greater opportunities for automation—is not surprising, the former implication, which

links the responsiveness of technology to the baseline age composition of an industry, is novel

and potentially interesting to study empirically.

2.4 Implications for productivity

As noted in the Introduction, the endogenous response of automation technologies might fun-

damentally alter the implications of demographic change for productivity. With exogenous

technology, Proposition 1 showed that the effects of aging for aggregate productivity are am-

biguous, but when the middle-aged wage is greater than the senior wage, aging tends to reduce

aggregate output and productivity. We next show that with endogenous technology, aging cre-

ates a positive effect via the response of automation decisions, and when the workforce is aging,

it tends to increase productivity in industries with greater opportunities for automation relative

to others.

Proposition 7 Let εg denote the elasticity of the g(A) function with respect to A. There exists

ε̄g such that for εg > ε̄g, an increase in φ—aging—raises output in industries with greater ρ(i)

relative to industries with smaller ρ(i).

15This result does not imply that automation cannot reduce wages. First, when the productivity effect is small,

the impact of automation is to reduce wages (relative to the benchmark with the same demographic changes

but with technology held constant). Second, in a multi-country setting (as in Acemoglu and Restrepo, 2018),

demographic changes in one country induce the development of automation technologies which then spread to

other countries and may reduce wages there.

18



To illustrate this proposition, consider the extreme case where A(i)∗ is fixed exogenously at

Ã(i),16 and that technology choices are differentiable. Then the effect of aging on the output of

industry i is

d lnY (i)∗

dφ
=

d lnY ∗

dφ
− σα(i)sL(i)

d lnW ∗

dφ
− σ(1− α(i))

d ln V ∗

dφ
+ σα(i)

sL(i)

1 − θ(i)∗
π(i)Γi

d lnW ∗

dφ
.

The term σα(i) sL(i)1−θ(i)∗ π(i)Γi
d lnW ∗

dφ
captures the endogenous response of automation technology

to demographic change. From Proposition 6, this endogenous response of technology is stronger

in industries with greater α(i) and greater ρ(i). The latter implies the result in Proposition

7—industries that have greater opportunities for automation invest more in automation tech-

nologies in response to aging and have better relative productivity performance. However, the

effect of α(i) is ambiguous, because industries that rely more heavily on middle-aged labor also

directly lose more due to aging. This discussion also highlights that the aggregate productivity

implications of aging will be ambiguous in the presence of endogenous automation decisions, and

as already anticipated in the Introduction, demographic change may not have major negative

effects once technology adjusts.

3 Data

In this section, we present our various data sources. We also illustrate the differential trends

across countries with different demographic changes and provide descriptive statistics that will

be useful to assess the quantitative magnitudes of the results we present later.

3.1 Cross-country and commuting-zone data

Our main data source on robots is the International Federation of Robotics (IFR), which provides

information on the stock of robots and new robot installations by industry, country and year.

These data are compiled by surveying global robot suppliers. The data cover 52 countries from

1993 to 2014. Appendix Table A1 provides the list of countries in our sample.17

Table 1 summarizes our cross-country data on industrial robots. The denominator of the

number of robots per thousand workers is constructed using employment data for 1990 from the

International Labour Organization (ILO). We report summary statistics separately for the full

IFR sample, for 30 OECD countries and also for countries that are above and below median in

terms of demographic change (the measure of demographic change is explained below). In our

16The assumption that εg is sufficiently large ensures that we are close to this case and labor-augmenting

technologies do not respond much to aging.
17Although the IFR also reports data for Japan and Russia, these data underwent major reclassifications. For

instance, the IFR used to count dedicated machinery as part of the stock of industrial robots in Japan. Starting

in 2000, the IFR stopped counting dedicated machinery, making the numbers reported for Japan not comparable

over time. We thus exclude both countries from our analysis.

19



full sample, the number of robots per thousand workers increased from 0.72 in 1993 to 3.79 in

2014. We can further see that the increase in the stock of robots is more rapid for the OECD,

and more importantly for our focus, it is also more rapid for countries that are undergoing

more major demographic changes. The increase in the stock of robots per thousand workers for

all countries and the OECD sample are also visible in Figure 5, which in addition shows the

trends for the United States, Germany and Korea, underscoring the pattern we noted in the

Introduction—that Germany and South Korea are considerably ahead of the United States in

terms of the adoption of robotics technology.

Table 1 presents information on our demographic variables as well. Our main measure is the

change in the ratio of senior (56 and older) workers to middle-aged workers (between 21 and

55). This measure is motivated by the patterns of substitution between robots and workers we

document in the next section. We show in our empirical work that the exact age thresholds are

not important for our results. Our main data source for demographic variables is the United

Nations, which provides population by age and also population forecasts. Our baseline measure

is for the change between 1990 and 2025, motivated by the fact that investments in robotics

will have to take into account expected population trends. The table shows that our group of

rapidly-aging countries has already undergone and are expected to further undergo significant

demographic change (relative to the slowly-aging group). Figure 6 depicts these trends, and also

shows that aging is much faster in Germany and South Korea and is slower in the United States

than the OECD average.

Though not reported in the table, in our econometric models we also utilize country data on

GDP per capita, population, average years of schooling, and the capital to output ratio obtained

from version 9.0 of the Penn World Tables (Feenstra, Inklaar and Timmer, 2015).

We complement the IFR data with estimates of robots imports from the bilateral trade

statistics in the Comtrade dataset, which covers 145 countries. We exclude from the sample the

major robot producers (Germany, Japan and South Korea) for whom robot imports is not a

reliable measure of investments in robotics technology, and countries that engage in significant

entrepôt trade (Belgium, Hong Kong, Luxembourg and Singapore). The bottom rows of Table

1 provide summary statistics from this data set. We see a significant increase in the dollar

value of robot imports between 1996 and 2015 for our full sample and a much larger increase

for rapidly-aging countries.

For US labor markets, we use data compiled by Leigh and Kraft (2016) on the location of

robot integrators in the United States to compute the number of integrators in each commuting

zone.18 As mentioned in the Introduction, integrators install, program and maintain robots, and

given the nature of the services they provide, they tend to locate close to their customers. Thus,

the location of these companies is proxy for the geographic distribution of robots-related activity

18Commuting zones, defined in Tolbert and Sizer (1996), are groupings of counties approximating local labor

markets. We use 722 commuting zones covering the entire US continental territory except for Alaska and Hawaii.

20



in the United States. We finally use data on “exposure to robots” and various economic outcomes

across commuting zones. These data are constructed exactly as in Acemoglu and Restrepo

(2017a), and to economize on space, we refer the reader to the descriptions in that paper. We

only note here that data on demographic change across commuting zones are computed from

the 1990 US Census and the American Community Survey (see Ruggles et al., 2010).

3.2 Industry-level data

In addition to the country-level data, the IFR reports data on robot installations by year sep-

arately for 19 industries in 50 of the countries in our sample, including 13 industries at the

three-digit level within manufacturing and six non-manufacturing industries at the two-digit

level. As Table A1 in the Appendix shows, these data are not available in every year for every

country-industry pair, so in our analysis, we will focus on annual data rather than long differ-

ences. Table 2 summarizes the industry-level data. For each industry, we report the average

number of robot installations per thousand workers, using two possible denominators, one from

the UNIDO data set for employment at the three-digit manufacturing industries in 1995 (which

covers 46 of the countries in our IFR data, but has no information on employment outside man-

ufacturing), and another from the EUKLEMS dataset, which provides employment for all 19 of

our industries, but only covers 22 of the countries in our sample (Jägger, 2016). We also use the

EUKLEMS data to obtain information on the growth in value added per worker in real dollars

from 1995 to 2007 for all the 19 industries included in the IFR data, and these data are reported

in the third column of Table 2.19 Finally, the last column of the table provides information on

the age composition of workers in that industry in the United States in 1990 (computed from

the 1990 Census).

In addition to the age composition of employment in an industry, our theoretical framework

emphasizes the importance of the opportunities for automation. To proxy for this, we rely on

two measures. The first is the “replaceability” index constructed by Graetz and Michaels (2015),

which is derived from data on the share of hours spent by workers in the United States on tasks

that can be performed by industrial robots. For this measure we only report the summary

statistics at the bottom of the table; the full data by industry can be obtained from Graetz

and Michaels (2015).20 The second measure is a dummy variable for automobiles, electronics,

metal products, metal machinery, and chemicals, plastics and pharmaceuticals, which are singled

out by a recent report by the Boston Consulting Group (BCG, 2015) as industries with the

19We use employment levels in 1995 to normalize the number of robot installations because the data are missing

for many countries before then. We also focus on the growth in value added per worker from 1995 to 2007 because

post-2007 data are unavailable for many countries in our sample.
20A bivariate regression for the 19 industries in our sample shows that a 10 percentage point increase in

the replaceability index is associated with 0.35 additional robot installations per thousand workers (standard

error=0.16). Replaceability alone explains 22% of the total variation in the installation of robots across industries.

21



greatest technological opportunities for automation (and this is also the group of highly-robotized

industry used in Acemoglu and Restrepo, 2017a). Table 1 confirms that these are the industries

experiencing the most rapid growth in the adoption of robots in the IFR data.

4 The Substitution between Robots and Workers

In this section, we document the age pattern of substitution between robots and workers. Our

main finding, which forms the basis of the analysis in the rest of the paper, is that robots are

most highly substitutable for middle-aged workers (those between the ages of 35 and 54), and

least substitutable with senior workers (those above 55).

We start by presenting the distribution of employment in highly-robotized industries (listed

in the previous section). Table 2 shows that these industries correspond to the ones with the

largest increase in the number of robots per thousand workers.

Figure 7 plots the age distribution of workers employed in highly-robotized industries as well

as all employed workers and the overall population (above 20) in the United States. Since it is

blue-collar workers that are at the greatest risk of displacement by industrial robots, we also show

the age distribution of blue-color workers in highly-robotized industries. The three panels of the

figure are for 1990, 2000 and 2007. All three panels show that all workers and blue-color workers

in highly-robotized industries are more likely to be younger than 55 relative to both all employed

workers and the full population. We interpret this evidence as supporting our presumption that

industrial robots are more substitutable for the tasks performed by middle-aged workers than

for the tasks performed by older (or younger) workers.21

Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017a) exploited differences in the historical industrial composition

of US commuting zones to construct a measure of exposure to robots. Using this measure of

exposure, we estimated the local employment and wage effects of robots. Here we use the same

strategy to estimate the impact of robots on workers in different age groups located in highly

exposed labor markets. To conserve space, we will not provide the full details of the approach in

Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017a), instead, summarizing its main tenets. Acemoglu and Restrepo

(2017a) focus for the most part on reduced-form models exploiting the potentially exogenous

component of exposure to robots (coming from variation in industry-level adoption in other

advanced economies).22 We follow the same strategy here and construct the exposure to robots

21An alternative interpretation of this pattern is that robots are being introduced in industries where middle-

aged workers are overrepresented because they are complementary to these workers. Though we do not find this a

plausible hypothesis (since robots typically displace workers in certain tasks rather than directly complementing

them), we provide an additional piece of evidence against it by showing that the introduction of industrial robots

in a US local labor market has a strong negative impact on middle-aged workers.
22In that paper, we also report two-stage least squares estimates combining this measure of exposure to robots

with changes in robots in US industries. IV estimates are very similar to the reduced-form results both in that

paper and in the present context, and are omitted to save space.

22



measure as

Exposure to robots

from 1993 to 2007z
=
∑

i∈I

ℓ1970zi

(
p30

(
Ri,2007
Li,1990

)
− p30

(
Ri,1993
Li,1990

))
, (21)

where Ri,t/Li,t is the number of robots per thousand workers in industry i at time t, the sum

runs over all the industries in the IFR data, ℓ1970zi stands for the 1970 share of commuting zone

z employment in industry i, which we compute from the 1970 Census, and p30

(
Ri,t

Li,1990

)
denotes

the 30th percentile of robot usage among European countries in industry i and year t.23

Figure 8 reports estimates of the effects of robots on the employment rate and wages of

workers in different 10-year age bins. More specifically, we estimate the following models for

employment and wages by age group across commuting zones:

∆Lz,a =β
L
a

Exposure to robots

from 1993 to 2007z
+ ǫLz,a and ∆ lnWz,a =β

W
z,a

Exposure to robots

from 1993 to 2007z
+ ǫWz,a,

where ∆Lz,a is the change in the employment rate of age group a in commuting zone z between

1990 and 2007, and ∆ lnWz,a is the change in the average wage of workers in age group a in

commuting zone z between 1990 and 2007. We then plot the estimates of the coefficients βLa

and βWa (together with 95% confidence intervals based on heteroscedasticity-robust standard

errors). We focus on three specifications similar to those in Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017a),

except that in line with the focus here all regressions are unweighted (while given the focus there

on aggregate changes, the main specifications in Acemoglu and Restrepo, 2017a, were weighted

by population). The first one we report is the baseline specification in Acemoglu and Restrepo

(2017a) and controls for Census region fixed effects, demographic differences across commuting

zones, broad industry shares, and the impact of trade with China and Mexico, routinization,

and offshoring.24 The second specification, in addition, removes the seven commuting zones

with the highest exposure to robots, to ensure that the results are not being driven by the most

exposed commuting zones. The last specification pools the data for all age groups and forces

our covariates, except the impact of exposure to robots, to have the same impact on all workers.

The top panel is for employment, while the bottom panel is for wages. In both cases, we see

negative effects for workers between the ages of 35 and 54, and no negative effects on those

younger than 35 and older than 55.25 In Figure A1 in the Appendix, we report similar results

23Using baseline shares from 1970, 1980 or 1990 or using other moments of the distribution of robots across

European nations leads to very similar results.
24Specifically, we control for log population, the share of working-age population (between 16 and 65 years); the

shares of population with college degree and with high school, the share of Blacks, Hispanics and Asians, and the

baseline shares of employment in manufacturing, durable manufacturing and construction, as well as the share of

female employment in manufacturing. The variables for exposure to China trade, Mexico trade, routine jobs and

offshoring are described in detail in Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017a).
25In weighted regressions, the estimates for employment are very similar, but we do see some significant negative

wage effects for older groups as well. This might reflect the downward wage pressure exerted by displaced middle-

aged workers in some large commuting zones.

23



by five-year age bins, confirming these age thresholds.

Overall, the results in this section provide direct evidence that there is a high degree of

substitution between robots and middle-aged workers (relative to older and in fact younger

workers), and motivate the rest of our analysis.

5 Demographic Change and The Adoption of Robots

In this section, we present our main cross-country results, which show a robust negative associ-

ation between the ratio of middle-aged to older workers and the adoption of robots.

5.1 Main Results

Table 3 starts with a flexible specification for the relationship between demographics and the

adoption of robots. Since we have no strong priors on the time horizon at which firms should

respond to demographic change, our focus throughout will be on long-differences specifications,

where we look at the relationship between various demographic change variables and the change

in robots-related activity between 1993 and 2014. More specifically, our regression equation is

∆
Rc
Lc

= βy∆ lnYoungc + βm∆ lnMiddle-agedc + βo∆ lnOldc + ΓXc,1990 + εc, (22)

where ∆Rc
Lc

is the (annualized) change in the stock of robots per thousand workers between

1993 and 2014 in country c (where we keep the denominator fixed as employment in 1990 from

the ILO, which avoids potentially endogenous changes in employment impacting our left-hand

side variable). The right-hand side variables are the changes between 1990 and 2025 in the log

population of three age groups—those younger than 35, those between the ages of 36-55 and

those above the age of 56 (where the change between 2017 and 2025 is based on the population

forecasts of the United Nations described in Section 3). Our use of demographic change extending

to 2025 is motivated by the fact that robot adoption decisions are typically forward-looking and

what is relevant is not just the current population, but its composition in the near future. The

IFR estimates that robots depreciate after 12 years, which implies that decisions to adopt robots

in 2014 should take into account population trends at least until 2025. Indeed, we show below

that demographic change in this extended time window has slightly greater explanatory power

than just focusing on contemporaneous changes, though the qualitative results are similar either

way (as we show in the Appendix). The vector Xc,1990 includes additional baseline covariates,

and εc is the error term. Unless otherwise indicated, all of our regressions are unweighted and

all standard errors are robust against heteroskedasticity.

Panel A of Table 3 presents our estimates of equation (22). Columns 1-3 are for the full

sample. Column 1 is our most parsimonious specification, and regresses the change in robots per

thousand workers on the population variables and regional dummies to account for differential

24



cross-region trends.26 Column 2 adds the 1990 values of log GDP per capita, log population,

average schooling and the ratio of the population above 56 to those between 21 and 55 (a baseline

control in our other tables) as covariates, thus allowing for differential trends in the adoption of

robots by initial values of these variables. Column 3 also includes the stock of industrial robots

per thousand workers in 1993, thus allowing countries with more robots at the beginning of the

sample to diverge from those that were already behind in 1993.27 Columns 4-6 parallel the first

three columns, but present estimates for the OECD sample.

In all six columns of Panel A, a decline in the population of those between 36 and 55

(relative to the population of those above the age of 56) is associated with faster robot adoption.

Though not always precise, these estimates confirm the expectations formed on the basis of the

substitution patterns in the previous section, and indicate that the relative scarcity of workers

most substitutable to robots—those in the middle-age category—do indeed increase the adoption

of robots. The quantitative magnitudes are large but plausible. For example, in column 1, the

coefficient estimate on population of the middle-aged group is -0.64 (standard error = 0.20).

This estimate implies that a 10 percent decline in the population of the middle-aged group

(which is roughly the decline expected for Germany) is associated with 0.064 additional robots

per thousand workers per year, or 1.28 additional robots per thousand workers over the whole

sample period (which is about a third of the average number of robots per thousand workers in

2014).

Panel B shows very similar patterns when we instead look at three age groups constructed

as those between the ages of 21 and 35, between the ages of 36 and 55, and between the ages of

56 and 65, while at the same time controlling for change in total population. We again find a

negative estimate for the change in the population of those between 36 and 55, and a positive

estimate for the change in the population of those between the ages of 56 and 65. Interestingly,

holding the age composition constant, changes in the overall population do not seem to correlate

with the adoption of robots.28

Finally, Panel C shows that we obtain very similar results when we aggregate the workforce

into two age groups: those between the ages of 26 and 55 and those above 56. The change in

the population of the first group has a negative coefficient on the adoption of robots, while the

change in the population of the second group has a positive coefficient.

26These regions are East Asia and the Pacific, South Asia, Middle East and North Africa, Africa, Eastern

Europe and Central Asia, Latin America and the Caribbean, and OECD countries.
27This is particularly important, since there might be “mean reversion” patterns. Controlling for the initial

stock of robots also enables us to be more flexible on the implied functional form (in particular, on the issue of

logs vs. levels). In any case, as we show in Table A4 in the Appendix, the results are similar if we use ln(1 +Rc)

or lnRc as the dependent variable (where the latter specification leads to a smaller sample because the initial

stock of robots is zero for several countries).
28This is the basis of our claim in the Introduction while discussing the work by Abelianisky and Prettner

(2017) that we do not find evidence of direct effects from population to automation.

25



Overall, the results in Table 3 suggest that the adoption of robotics technologies is signif-

icantly correlated with changes in the age composition of the population—in particular, with

demographic changes that increase the share of older workers and reduce the share of middle-

aged workers. This motivates a more parsimonious specification, linking the adoption of robots

to the ratio of older to middle-aged workers, which we explore in Table 4 and focus on in the

rest of the paper. Namely, our main specification in the rest of the paper will be

∆
Rc
Lc

= βAgingc + ΓXc,1990 + εc, (23)

where the key difference from specification (22) is that we use the variable Agingc, defined as

the change between 1990 and 2025 in the ratio of “senior” workers (above 56 years of age) to

middle-aged workers (those between 21 and 55). Table A3 in the Appendix shows that different

choices for age cutoffs lead to similar results.

Table 4 reports estimates of equation (23) for the same specifications as in Table 3. Panel

A focuses on OLS models, while Panel B estimates instrumental-variables (IV) models. Our IV

models are motivated by the concern that changes in labor markets that influence the adoption

of robots may also affect migration patterns and longevity, which would bias our OLS estimates.

To address this concern, we instrument the (expected) aging from 1990 to 2025 using the average

birth rates over five-year intervals from 1950-1954 to 1980-1984. These birth rates satisfy the

requisite exogeneity assumption since past changes in birth rates are unlikely to be driven by

contemporaneous wages or technologies, and explain a large portion of the variation in our

demographic change variable (in column 3, the first stage F -statistic is 13.67).

The estimates in Panel A confirm the positive effect of an aging population on the adoption

of robots. The results are now more precisely estimated and are significant at 5% or less in

all specifications (partly because we have a single demographic change variable on the right-

hand side rather than three or four correlated variables as in Table 3, where the qualitative

patterns were similar but some estimates were less precise). The quantitative effects are again

substantial. For example, our most parsimonious specification in column 1 has a R2 of 0.43

(and the partial R2 of the aging variable alone is close to 0.40 as noted in the Introduction).

In our preferred specification in column 3, the coefficient estimate on the aging variable is 0.45

(standard error = 0.19). This implies that a 20 percentage point increase in our aging variable,

which is approximately the difference between Germany and the United States (0.5 vs. 0.28,

respectively), leads to an increase of 0.09 robots per thousand workers per year or 1.8 additional

robots per thousand workers over our entire period of analysis and would account for 25 percent

of the difference in the adoption of robots between Germany and the United States. Panel B

shows that the IV estimates of the effect of demographic change on the adoption are similar,

but slightly larger.

Figure 9 depicts the relationship between our measure of demographic change and the number

of robots per thousand workers in the full sample of countries and in the OECD (from the models

26



estimated in columns 3 and 6 in Table 4). The relationship between demographic change and

the adoption of robots is clearly visible in both panels, and we can also see that this relationship

is not driven by any outliers.

5.2 Placebo Exercises, Robustness and Additional Results

In this subsection we first show that past demographic changes have no predictive power for

the adoption of robotics technology, then document the robustness of the results in Table 4 to

a range of variations, and then finally present some additional results.

In Panel A of Table 5, we include the same aging variable on the right-hand side, but now

it is measured between 1950 and 1990. Past demographic changes should have no impact on

the adoption of robotics technology after 1990—unless countries that have adopted more robots

since 1993 were on different demographic trends for other reasons even before the 1990s. The

results in Table 5 are reassuring in this respect and show no correlation between our aging

variable between 1950 and 1990 and the change in the number of robots per thousand workers

since 1990. Figure 10 shows the partial regression relationship between the placebo demographic

change measure (between 1950 and 1990) and the change in the number of robots per thousand

workers between 1993 and 2014, both for all countries in our sample and for the OECD countries.

Panel B of Table 5 presents a complementary exercise where we simultaneously include past aging

and expected aging (from 1990 to 2025)as explanatory variables. The results show that only

expected aging is an important determinant of the adoption of robots.

Panel C of Table 5 further investigates the question of whether it is contemporaneous de-

mographic change or the expectation of future aging that is more strongly associated with the

adoption of robots. We simultaneously include aging from 1990 to 2015—the contemporaneous

demographic change—and expected aging from 2015 to 2025. The results are not as precise as

before, because contemporaneous and expected aging are highly correlated. Nevertheless, our

estimates show that both contemporaneous aging and expected aging are correlated with the

adoption of robots. Indeed, in no specification can we reject the null hypothesis that contem-

poraneous and expected aging have the same impact on robot adoption. Expected aging plays

a particularly important role in the OECD sample, where it is significant at the 10% level in

all models. These results support our choice of focusing on (expected) aging between 1990 and

2025 in our baseline models. In any case, Table A2 in the Appendix shows that our main results

are very similar if we use the contemporaneous variable in our main specifications.

We have so far focused on long-difference specifications, focusing on the change in the stock

of robots between 1993 and 2014. This is the most transparent specification, especially in

view of the evidence that it is not just contemporaneous but future demographic changes that

are impacting the adoption of robots. Nevertheless, such long-difference specifications fail to

exploit the potential covariation between demographic change and the adoption of robots in

subperiods. To exploit this additional source of variation, Table 6 turns to stacked-differences

27



models, where for each country we include two observations on the left-hand side—the change

in the stock of robots from 1993 to 2005 and from 2005 to 2015. We then regress these changes

on the aging variable from 1990 to 2005 and 2005 to 2015, respectively. Panel A presents our

OLS estimates. Columns 1 and 4 give our most parsimonious model where we only control

for region and period dummies. Columns 2 and 5 include all the country level covariates as

controls (1990 values of log GDP per capita, local population, average schooling and ratio of

older to middle-aged workers). Panel B presents the corresponding IV estimates. The estimates

confirm our main results in Table 4. In columns 3 and 6, we go one step further relative to our

earlier specifications and also include linear country trends (or country dummies in the change

specification). These specifications only exploit the differential rate at which demographic change

proceeds and additional robots are adopted in the two subperiods for each country. Remarkably,

the estimates in these demanding specifications are not just highly significant, but they are

also very similar to our baseline estimates, bolstering our confidence in the interpretation and

robustness of our results.

Besides aging, our model suggests that other factors affecting wages, such as unionization,

and potentially the wage level itself are important determinants of the adoption of robots. We

explore these issues in Table 7, where in addition to estimating the impact of aging on robot

adoption, we control for the baseline union membership and the log of average hourly wage in

1993.29 Panel A presents OLS estimates and Panel B presents IV estimates, again instrumenting

for aging with past birth rates. Because the data on union membership are only available for

a subset of countries, our sample now consists of 38 countries, 30 of which are in the OECD.

The results provide some support for the idea that countries with greater unionization rates

adopted more robots, though this result is not as robust as the effects of demographic change

documented so far. The positive effect of unionization on the adoption of robots is consistent

with the view that unions raise labor costs and create additional incentives for firms to automate

production. Quantitatively, our estimates in column 3 of Panel B imply that a 10 percentage

point increase in union membership—roughly the difference between Germany and the United

States—is associated with 0.021 additional robots per thousand workers per year (standard

error=0.01), which amount to 0.42 robots over the whole 1993-2014 period. Though non-trivial,

this quantitative effect is about a quarter of the impact of aging (when similarly scaled). The

wage level, on the other hand, does not seem to have a robust impact on the adoption of

robots. This might be because high wages reflect not just greater “wage push,” but also higher

productivity of workers, which is likely to discourage automation.

In preparation for our industry-level estimates, we next explore the annual data on robot

29We use the average share of workers belonging to a union between 1990 and 1995 as our measure of unionization

(from the ILO and Visser, 2016). We obtained similar results using an alternative unionization series from the

Labor Market Data Base (Rama, 1996). The data on wages are from the Penn World Tables, version 9.0 (see

Feenstra, Inklaar and Timmer, 2015).

28



installations. Table 8 presents estimates of the model

IRc,t
Lc,1990

= βAgingc,2025−1990 + ΓtXc,1990 + δt + εc,t, (24)

where the left-hand side variable, in contrast to equation (23), denotes the (annual) installation

of new robots per thousand workers (with the denominator still corresponding to employment in

1990). Correspondingly, we also allow the covariates in Xc,1990 to have time-varying coefficients

and include year effects δt. The sample covers every year between 1993 and 2014, our regressions

are again unweighted, and the standard errors are now robust against heteroscedasticity and

correlation (clustering) at the country level. Panel A presents OLS estimates and Panel B

presents IV estimates. Overall, the estimates are very similar to those of Table 4, with the minor

differences explained by the depreciation of the stock of robots (if robots did not depreciate,

the two models would yield the exact same results since total installations would add up to the

change in the stock of robots).

Finally, we also explored models in logs rather than in the number of robots per thousand

workers as in our baseline specification. In Appendix Table A4, we present estimates using

either ∆ ln(1+Rc) or ∆ lnRc as the dependent variable (in both cases, these are long differences

from 1993 to 2014, and we again control for initial stock of robots on the right-hand side). The

former specification is motivated by the fact that the initial stock of robots is equal to zero for

several countries. We also estimate Poisson regressions for a variant of the model in equation

(24) using the number of robot installations per year in each country as the dependent variable.

In all cases, the results are very similar to our baseline estimates.

5.3 Alternative Measures of Investment in Robots and Automation

We have so far focused on robots because of the available data, though we believe that similar

forces are at work for other automation technologies. In Table 9 we use Comtrade data on the

imports of various intermediate goods (embodying different types of technologies) to explore the

implications of demographic changes for a different measure of investment in robots and other

automation technologies. As noted in Section 3, in these data we can only measure imports of

these technologies—not their usage, which varies in countries that produce robots. Despite this

shortcoming, we believe it is useful to study this alternative measure of investment in robots as

well as the complementary measures of automation technologies.

For different types of imports, we estimate a variant of equation (23) but using log of imports

in that category normalized by total intermediate imports as the dependent variable.30 For each

of the import categories indicated in the top row, Panel A presents OLS estimates, while Panel

B reports corresponding IV estimates.

In in the first column, as discussed in the Introduction, we look at the imports of indus-

trial robots. The Comtrade data report the total dollar value of imports of industrial robots,

30This normalization is important, since total intermediate inputs are correlated with aging.

29



which enables us to compute the log of the total value of imports relative to total imports of

intermediates between 1990 and 2016. As also noted in Section 3, in this case we exclude the

major robots producers in our dataset (Germany and South Korea), and countries engaging in

significant entrepôt trade (Belgium, Hong Kong, Luxembourg and Singapore). This measure of

the change in the value of imports of industrial robots is highly correlated with our IFR measure

of the change in the stock of robots per thousand workers, both in levels and in logs, as shown in

Figure 11.31 The estimates in column 1 of Table 9 confirm the patterns we have documented so

far—both in the OLS and IV, there is a strong association between aging (measured in exactly

the same way as in our main specification) and the change in the imports of robots (relative to

total intermediate imports). The IV coefficient estimate is 4.66 (standard error = 2.14) in Panel

B, and implies that a 20 percentage point increase in aging, once again corresponding to the

difference in expected aging between Germany and the US, leads to a 92 log points increase in

the imports of industrial robots relative to total intermediate imports. Figure 12 presents the

relationship between imports of industrial robots (relative to total intermediate imports) and

aging visually, and confirms that this relationship is not driven by outliers.

The rest of the table looks at the imports of a number of other technologies (or more appro-

priately, imports of intermediates embodying these technologies). Columns 2-4 consider three

other automation technologies, numerically controlled machines, weaving and knitting machines,

and vending machines and ATMs. In each case, we see a positive correlation between our aging

measure and the imports of these machines relative to total intermediate imports. This evidence

supports the presumption that the effect of aging on the adoption of robots is indicative of a

broader relationship between demographic change and automation.

Columns 5 and 6 turn to two other classes of technologies, computers and agricultural ma-

chinery (including tractors, harvesters and plows), which are interesting in their own right, but a

priori may or may not be examples of automation technologies.32 In both OLS and IV, we see a

positive association between aging and computers, and a negative and insignificant relationship

between aging and agricultural machinery.

Columns 7 and 8 report results with two technologies that can be considered as broadly labor-

augmenting—miscellaneous tools (which includes a wide range of metal hand tools) and general

equipment (which includes machinery used in industrial applications that is not autonomous nor

31In the level specification, the bivariate regression coefficient is of 73,243 (standard error=7,958). This coeffi-

cient is reasonable in view of the fact that the cost of a typical robot ranges between $50,000 and $100,000 (This

excludes the costs of installation and programming, which often add about $300,000 to the cost of a robot, but

since these services are typically provided by local integrators, they do not show up in import statistics).
32Computers are used in a wide range of tasks, and with workers of all ages, so their substitution patterns

and effects on the labor market are likely to be broader than those of industrial robots, which we have argued to

be more strongly substitutable for middle-aged workers. Indeed, the results in Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017a)

suggest that the effects of computer technology on local employment and wages may be quite different than the

effects of robots.

30



numerically controlled). In both cases, our IV estimates show small and non-significant effects

of aging on the imports of these technologies relative to total intermediate imports. This pattern

is consistent with the presumption that these technologies are closer to our labor-augmenting

category than the automation category (though we also do not see a negative impact).

Finally, column 9 estimates the relationship between aging and the capital-output ratio from

the Penn World Tables, and shows a positive relationship, which we interpret as partly reflect-

ing the effect on the capital stock of additional investments in robotics and other automation

technologies induced by aging.

Overall, the results from the bilateral import data confirm the relationship between demo-

graphic change and investment in robotics we have documented so far using a very different

data source, and also provide suggestive evidence that a similar relationship may hold for other

automation technologies.

6 Demographics and Robots across US Commuting Zones

In this section, we estimate the relationship between aging and the adoption of robots across US

commuting zones. Though we do not have direct measures of installations or stocks of robots

across US local labor markets, as explained above we proxy for robots-related activity relying

on Leigh and Kraft’s (2016) measure of the number of integrators (which specialize in installing,

programming and maintaining robots). The number of integrators was shown to be related to

other measures of exposure to robots in Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017a).

Panel A of Table 10 reports estimates of the model

ln(1 + Integratorsz) = βAgingz + ΓXz,1990 + υz

across 722 US commuting zones. Here z indexes a commuting zone, Integratorsz is the number of

integrators in commuting zone z, and because it is equal to zero in several commuting zones, we

formulate the dependent variable as ln(1+ Integratorsz). Agingz now designates the change in

the ratio of workers above 56 to those between 21 and 55 between 1990 and 2015 in commuting

zone z, constructed from the Census and the American Community Survey, and Xz,1990 is a

vector of additional commuting-zone characteristics measured in 1990, which always includes the

exposure to robots measure from Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017a). Panels B and C of the table

report estimates from alternative specifications with the number of integrators, Integratorsz,

and a dummy variable for the presence of any integrators in the commuting zone as dependent

variables. As in our other models, we focus on unweighted regressions and the standard errors are

robust against heteroskedasticity and correlation at the state level. In all panels, odd-numbered

columns only include census region dummies, while even-numbered columns control for the same

set of covariates we included in our analysis of the effects of exposure to robots on workers of

different ages reported in Figure 8 (see footnote 24).

31



In columns 1 and 2, we see in a negative relationship between our demographic change

variable and the location of integrators. This is, however, largely because the age composition

of the population in a commuting zone is highly endogenous to the economic changes in the

area. In the remaining columns of the table, we focus on the source of variation coming from

past cohort sizes as in our cross-country IV specifications. More specifically, in columns 3 and 4

we use the size of cohorts in each commuting zone in 1990 to predict the change in aging until

2015. In columns 5 and 6, we use the sizes of cohorts aged 0-5 and 6-10 in 1950, 1960, 1970,

1980 and 1990 to instrument for our aging variable. In contrast to our OLS estimates, the IV

estimates in all panels show a positive impact of aging on the location of integrators, which

is statistically significant in all cases except in columns 5 and 6 in Panel B, when we look at

the number of integrators. Figure 13 depicts the IV relationship between demographic change

and robots across commuting zones from the specification in column 4 of Panel A. The positive

relationship is clearly visible. Quantitatively, the effects are again sizable. A 10 percentage point

increase in our aging variable—which is approximately the average in our sample—is associated

with 1.7 additional integrators and a 20 percentage point increase in the probability of having

at least one robot integrator.

Overall, even though our proxy for robots-related activity in this section, the number of

integrators in the area, is far from perfect, the evidence is broadly supportive of the positive

impact of aging on the adoption of robots when we focus on cross-commuting zone variation as

well.

7 Demographics and Robots: Industry-Level Results

Our theoretical analysis in Section 2 highlighted that the response of robotics technology to

demographic change—an increase in the ratio of older to middle-aged workers—should be more

pronounced in industries that rely more on middle-aged workers and also in industries in which

these middle-aged workers engage in tasks that can be more productively automated. We now

investigate these predictions using the industry-level data from IFR summarized in Table 2.

Table 11 estimates regression models similar to those reported in Table 8, except that our

data now vary by country and industry. In particular, our main specification augments equation

(24) by including interaction effects:

IRi,c,t
Li,c,1990

=βAgingc + βRAgingc ×Reliance on Middle-Aged Workersi (25)

+ βPAgingc ×Opportunities for Automationi + Γi,tXc,1990 + αi + δt + εi,c,t,

where the left-hand side variable denotes the (annual) installation of new robots per thousand

workers in industry i, country c and year t, Agingc is once again defined as the change in the ratio

of the population above 56 to those between 21 and 55 from 1990 to 2025, αi denotes industry

32



effects, δt designates time effects, and we also allow the coefficients on the country-level covariates

in Xc,1990 to vary over time and have different effects by industry. The new variables, Reliance

on Middle-Aged Workersi and Opportunities for Automationi, capture industry-characteristics

which our theory predicts should impact the response of the adoption of robots to aging. Our

sample for this regression covers 50 countries and runs from 1993 to 2014, but is unbalanced since,

as indicated in Table A1., data are missing for several country×industry×year combinations.33

Finally, we report standard errors that are robust against heteroscedasticity and cross-industry

and temporal correlation at the country level.

To construct the denominator of our left-hand side variable, we use three approaches. First,

in Panel A we use the ILO country data to normalize robot installations by Li,c,1990 = Lc,1990/19

(recall that the IFR reports data for 19 industries). This normalization allows us to use all

50 countries for which there are industry-level robots data. Second, in Panel B we use the

UNIDO data on employment by country-industry pair described in Section 3. These data cover

12 manufacturing industries for 46 countries in our sample. Finally, in Panel C we use the

EUKLEMS data, also described in Section 3, which cover all the industries in our sample, but

only for 22 countries.

Column 1 in all panels presents estimates of equation (25) without any of the interaction

terms. Though not reported, our country covariates, Xc,1990, include region dummies, the log of

GDP per capita, log population, average years of schooling and the ratio of older to middle-aged

workers in 1990. Except for Panel B, which includes only manufacturing and produces larger

estimates, the average effect of aging is comparable to our cross-country estimates.

The remaining columns include the interaction of aging with reliance on middle-aged workers

and opportunities for automation. As described in Section 3, the former variable is constructed

from the 1990 census as the ratio of middle-aged to senior workers in that industry in the United

States. In columns 2-4, the Opportunity for automationi variable is proxied using Graetz and

Michaels’s replaceability index, which was also described in Section 3. In columns 5-7, we

instead use a dummy variable for the industries identified by BCG (2015). The estimates in

columns 2 and 5 show positive and statistically significant interactions with both variables in

all panels. The estimates in column 2 of Panel A indicate that a 10 percentage point increase

in aging leads to an increase of 0.15 (= 1.66× 0.9× 0.1) annual robot installations per thousand

workers in an industry at the 75th percentile of reliance on middle-aged workers compared to an

industry at the 25th percentile. More specifically, in electronics, which is at the 75th percentile of

reliance on middle-aged workers, a 10 percentage point increase in aging is predicted to increase

33In this and subsequent industry-level regressions, we weight country-industry pairs using the baseline share of

employment in each industry in that country. This weighting scheme ensures that all countries receive the same

weight—as in our unweighted country specifications—while industry weights reflect their relative importance in

each country (this is the same weighting scheme used by Graetz and Michaels, 2015 and Michaels, Natraj, and

Van Reenen, 2014).

33



installations of robots by 0.25 per thousand workers per year, while in basic metals, which is at

the 25th percentile, the same change is predicted to lead to only 0.1 more robots per thousand

workers. Similarly, a 10 percentage point increase in aging is associated with an increase of 0.155

(= 0.27×5.738×0.1) annual robot installations per thousand workers in an industry at the 75th

percentile of the replaceability index compared to an industry in the 25th percentile. In this

instance, automobile manufacturing is approximately at the 75th percentile of the replaceability

index, and a 10 percentage point increase in aging is predicted to increase installation of robots

by 0.21 per thousand workers per year in this industry, while the same change is predicted

to increase installation of robots only by about 0.05 per thousand workers in construction or

utilities, which are at the 25th percentile. In summary, aging increases robot installations 3 to 5

times more in the industries with the greatest reliance on middle-age workers and the greatest

opportunities for automation than in the average industry in column 1.

In columns 3 and 6, we control for a measure of the baseline extent of robot use in each

country-industry pair, which accounts for any unobserved industry characteristics that may be

correlated with initial investments and subsequent trends in robotics and/or for mean-reversion

(or other) dynamics.34

Finally, in columns 4 and 7 we control for a full set of country fixed effects (and we no

longer estimate the main effect of aging). In these models the interaction between aging and

industry characteristics is identified solely from within country variation. Reassuringly, the size

of the interaction coefficients does not change much, and we still find positive and statistically

significant interactions in all panels.

Table 12 reports IV estimates for the same specifications as in Table 11. As in our cross-

country analysis, we instrument demographic change using past birth rates, and we also include

interactions of these birth rates with our measures of reliance on middle-aged workers and

opportunities for automation to generate corresponding first-stages for the interaction terms. As

before, the first-stages are reasonably strong (the first-stage F -statistic for excluded instruments

ranges from 7.33 to 15.35 in the most demanding specifications; and moreover, our estimates

always comfortably pass Hansen’s overidentification test). The IV estimates confirm the patterns

reported in Table 11, and most importantly, show more pronounced responses to aging from

industries that rely more on middle-aged workers and have greater opportunities for automation.

In fact, these estimates are quantitatively quite similar to the OLS ones.

Table 13 reports placebo exercises for our industry-level results similar to those in Table 5.

To save space we focus on estimates that use the country employment from ILO to normalize

34Because we do not observe the stock of robots for all country-industry pairs in 1993, we follow Graetz and

Michales (2015) and impute these stocks when they are missing in 1993. To do so, we deflate the first observation

of the stock of robots in a country-industry pair back in time using the growth rate of the stock of total robots

in the country during the same period. Including this control reduces the heterogeneous impact of aging slightly,

but does not alter our qualitative conclusions.

34



the installation of robots, which yields the largest sample. Reassuringly, neither the main

effects nor the interaction terms involving past demographic changes are significant in this case;

although some of the interaction terms have positive coefficients in Panel A, they are statistically

insignificant and about half the size of their counterparts in Table 11. These coefficients become

even smaller, and continue to be insignificant, when we add expected aging in Panel B.

Overall, the cross-industry patterns provide support for the theoretical predictions of our

framework, and indicate that the response of investment in robots to demographic change is

considerably stronger in industries that rely more on middle-aged workers and that have greater

opportunities for automation.

8 Productivity

In this section, we turn to the relationship between demographic change and change in labor

productivity (real value-added per worker). As highlighted in our theoretical analysis in Section

2, this relationship is on in general ambiguous. On the one hand, demographic change might

reduce the number of high-productivity middle-aged workers relative to lower-productivity older

workers. On the other hand, demographic change might increase productivity because of the

technology adoption it induces. Nevertheless, our model also makes some unambiguous predic-

tions: because of the induced increase in automation, industries with the greatest potential for

automation should increase their value added per worker relative to other industries that cannot

rely on automation to substitute for middle-aged workers.

This issue is investigated in Table 14, where we present estimates of the following equation:

∆ lnV Ai,c =βAgingc + βRAgingc × Reliance on middle-aged workersi (26)

+ βPAgingc × Potential for the use of robotsi + ΓiXc,1995 + αi + εi,c,

where the left-hand side variable denotes the change in log value added per worker in industry

i in country c between 1995 and 2007. In Panels A and B, we measure this variable from the

EUKLEMS data, which cover the same 19 industries we have used throughout, but only for 22

countries. Because the productivity measure is only available from 1995 onwards, we adjust our

aging variable to be between 1995 and 2025 (rather than starting in 1990 as we had before). In

addition, we allow the baseline covariates in Xc,1995 to affect industries differently and include

industry effects, αi. In Panel C, we instead use the OECD STAN database, which includes

27 countries, but with patchier coverage of industries. In all cases, we use the same weighting

scheme as in our industry-level analysis of installation of robots, corresponding to unweighted

regressions across countries, and the standard errors are again robust against heteroscedasticity

and correlation at the country level.

The structure of Table 14 is similar to that of Table 11. Panel A presents OLS estimates and

Panel B reports IV estimates of equation (26) with the EUKLEMS data, while Panel C shows

35



IV results using the OECD STAN data. Column 1 in Panel A shows that aging reduces the

average growth of value added per worker. A 10 percentage point increase in aging is associated

with a 14.5% decline in value-added per worker (standard error=5.6%) in the top panel and a

17.3% decline in value-added per worker (standard error=6.2%). These results differ from the

findings in Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017b), where we showed that there was no negative effect

of aging on growth in GDP per capita. The negative estimates in column 1 here are driven by

the smaller samples in the EUKLEMS and OECD datasets, and are not robust to using other

measures of economic activity. For instance, as reported in Table A5 in the Appendix, if we

estimate the analogue of equation (26) at the country level for the larger sample, there is no

significant negative relationship.

Of greater interest given the theoretical predictions highlighted in Section 2 are the interac-

tion effects, especially the interaction between aging and opportunities for automation. Here,

we find a robust and sizable positive interaction, indicating that in the presence of aging, in-

dustries with greater opportunities for automation are experiencing relative productivity gains.

The magnitudes are sizable. For example, the IV estimate in column 2 of Panel B shows that

a 10 percentage points increase in aging causes an increase of 12% (= 0.27 × 4.498 × 0.1) in

the growth of value added per worker in an industry at the 75th percentile of the replaceability

index compared to an industry at the 25th percentile. This implies that in industries at the

25th percentile of the replaceability index, such as construction of utilities, a 10 percentage point

increase in aging Is predicted to reduce the growth of value added by 19.5% between 1995 and

2007, while the same change reduces the growth of value added only by 7.5% in industries at the

75th percentile, such as automobiles. This result confirms the basic premise from our theoreti-

cal analysis of productivity effects—that the endogenous automation response tends to increase

productivity in industries with greater opportunities for automation relative to industries with

lesser opportunities for automation or robotics.

We also find some negative estimates of the interaction between aging and reliance on middle-

aged workers, but as emphasized in Section 2, there are no tight predictions in this case, because

both the direct effect (which is negative) and the technology response effect (which can be

positive) tend to be greater for industries that rely more heavily on middle-aged workers.

Overall, consistent with our theoretical predictions, the evidence suggests that aging increases

relative productivity in industries that have the greatest opportunities for automation—and has

ambiguous effects on aggregate (or average) productivity.

9 Conclusion

The populations of most developed and many developing countries are aging rapidly. Many

economists see these demographic changes as major “headwinds” potentially slowing down or

even depressing economic growth in the decades to come (e.g., Gordon, 2016, Summers, 2013).

36



However, a reasoning based on directed technological change models—which highlight the effects

of changing scarcity of different types of labor on the adoption and development of technologies

substituting for these factors—suggests that these demographic changes should be associated

with major technological responses.

We have documented in this paper that this is indeed the case; countries and US labor

markets undergoing more major demographic change have invested significantly more in new

robotic technologies (and more broadly in a variety of automation technologies). We have argued

that this is because ongoing demographic changes are increasing the scarcity of middle-aged

workers and robots are most substitutable with middle-aged workers (which can be seen both

in the age composition of employment across industries with different investments in robotics,

and the causal effects of the exposure to robots on the employment and wages of workers of

different ages). The effects of demographic change on investment in robots are highly robust

and quantitatively sizable. For example, differential aging alone accounts for about 40% of the

cross-country variation in investment in robotics.

Our directed technological change model also predicts that the effects of demographic change

should be more pronounced in industries that rely more on middle-aged workers (because the

scarcity of middle-aged workers will be felt more acutely in these industries) and in those that

present greater technological opportunities for automation. Using the industry dimension of our

data, we provide extensive support for these predictions as well.

The technology responses to aging mean that the productivity implications of demographic

changes are more complex than previously recognized. Especially in industries most amenable

to automation, aging can trigger significantly more adoption of new robots and as a result, lead

to greater productivity—even if the direct effect of aging might be negative. Using industry-

level productivity data, we find that the main effect of aging on productivity is ambiguous, but

consistent with our theoretical predictions, in the face of demographic change industries with

the greatest opportunities for automation are experiencing more rapid growth of productivity

relative to other industries.

Several questions raised in this paper call for greater research. First, it is important to

investigate the effects of aging on technology adoption and productivity using more disaggre-

gated industry data and even more preferably firm-level data, to which we do not have access in

this paper. Second, it would be interesting to study whether the effects of demographic change

on technology adoption are being mediated through wages and whether other factors affecting

wages, such as differences in labor market institutions, also have similar effects on technology.

Third, our theoretical framework makes specific predictions about how aging may reduce invest-

ments in labor-augmenting technologies even as it is encouraging further automation. This is

another theoretical implication that we investigated with the data available to us, but can better

be studied using more disaggregated data on industries and technologies. Finally, motivated by

industrial robots, our focus has been on the substitution of machines for middle-aged workers in

37



production tasks (and mostly in manufacturing). Though it is well-known that with the advent

of artificial intelligence, a broader set of tasks can be automated, there is currently little research

on incentives for the automation of nonproduction tasks and their productivity implications.

References

Abeliansky, Ana and Klaus Prettner (2017) “Automation and Demographic Change,”

CEGE working paper 310.

Acemoglu, Daron (1998) “Why Do New Technologies Complement Skills? Directed

Technical Change and Wage Inequality,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(4): 1055-1089.

Acemoglu, Daron (2002) “Directed Technical Change,” Review of Economic Studies,

69(4): 781–810.

Acemoglu, Daron (2007) “Equilibrium Bias of Technology,” Econometrica, 75(5): 1371–

1410.

Acemoglu, Daron (2010) “When Does Labor Scarcity Encourage Innovation?” Journal

of Political Economy, 118(6): 1037–1078.

Acemoglu, Daron and David Autor (2011) “Skills, tasks and technologies: Implications

for employment and earnings,” Handbook of Labor Economics, 4: 1043–1171.

Acemoglu, Daron, and Joshua Linn (2004) “Market size in innovation: theory and

evidence from the pharmaceutical industry,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(3): 1049–

1090.

Acemoglu, Daron and Pascual Restrepo (2016) “The Race Between Machine and

Man: Implications of Technology for Growth, Factor Shares and Employment” NBER Working

Paper No. 22252.

Acemoglu, Daron and Pascual Restrepo (2017a) “Robots and Jobs: Evidence from

US Labor Markets” NBER Working Paper No. 23285.

Acemoglu, Daron and Pascual Restrepo (2017b) “Secular Stagnation? The Effect of

Aging on Economic Growth in the Age of Automation” NBER Working Paper No. 23077.

Akst, Daniel (2013) “What Can We Learn From Past Anxiety Over Automation?” Wilson

Quarterly.

Attanasio, Orazio, Sagiri Kitao, and Giovanni L. Violante (2007) “Global Demo-

graphic Trends and Social Security Reform,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(1): 144–198.

Autor, David H., Frank Levy and Richard J. Murnane (2003) “The Skill Content of

Recent Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,

118(4): 1279–1333.

Autor, David H. and David Dorn (2013) “The Growth of Low-Skill Service Jobs and

the Polarization of the U.S. Labor Market,” American Economic Review, 103(5): 1553–97.

38



Autor, David (2015) “Why Are There Still So Many Jobs? The History and Future of

Workplace Automation,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 29(3): 3-30.

Baldwin, Richard and Coen Teulings (2014) Secular Stagnation: Facts, Causes and

Cures, CEPR Press.

Boston Consulting Group (2015) “The Robotics Revolution: The Next Great Leap in

Manufacturing.”

Brynjolfsson, Erik and Andrew McAfee (2014) The Second Machine Age: Work,

Progress, and Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies, W. W. Norton & Company.

Clemens, Michael A., Ethan G. Lewis and Hannah M. Postel (2017) “Immigration

Restrictions as Active Labor Market Policy: Evidence from the Mexican Bracero Exclusion,”

NBER Working Paper No. 23125.

Costinot, Arnaud, Dave Donaldson, Margaret Kyle and Heidi Williams (2016)

“The More We Die, The More We Sell? A Simple Test of the Home-Market Effect,” NBER

Working Paper No. 22538.

De Nardi, Mariacristina, Selahattin Imrohoroglu and Thomas J. Sargent (1999)

“Projected U.S. Demographics and Social Security,” Review of Economic Dynamics 2:575–615.

Feenstra, Robert C., Robert Inklaar, and Marcel P. Timmer (2015) “The Next

Generation of the Penn World Table” American Economic Review, 105(10): 3150–82.

Finkelstein, Amy (2004) “Static and Dynamic Effects of Health Policy: Evidence from

the Vaccine Industry,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119 (2): 527–564.

Ford, Martin (2015) The Rise of the Robots, Basic Books, New York.

Geppert, Christian, Alexander Ludwig and Raphael Abiry (2016) “Secular Stagna-

tion? Growth, Asset Returns and Welfare in the Next Decades: First Results,” SAFE Working

Paper No. 145.

Goos, Maarten, and Alan Manning (2007) “Lousy and Lovely Jobs: The Rising Po-

larization of Work in Britain,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(1): 118-133.

Graetz, Georg and Guy Michaels (2015) “Robots at Work,” CEP Discussion Paper

No 1335.

Gregory, Terry, Anna Salomons, and Ulrich Zierahn (2016) “Racing With or Against

the Machine? Evidence from Europe,” ZEW - Centre for European Economic Research Discus-

sion Paper No. 16-053

Hanlon, Walker W. (2015) “Necessity Is the Mother of Invention: Input Supplies and

Directed Technical Change,” Econometrica, 83: 67–100.

Hansen, Alvin (1938) “Economic Progress and the Declining Population Growth” Amer-

ican Economic Review, 29(1), 1-15.

International Federation of Robotics (2014) Wold Robotics: Industrial Robots.

Jägger, Kirsten (2016) “EU KLEMS Growth and Productivity Accounts 2016 release -

Description of Methodology and General Notes.”

39



Kotlikoff, Larry J., Kent A. Smetters, and Jan Walliser (2002) “Finding a Way out

of America?s Demographic Dilemma,” NBER Working Paper No. 8258.

Krueger, Dirk (2004) “The Effects of Demographic Change on Aggregate Savings: Some

Implications from the Life Cycle Model,” Mimeo Johann Wolfgang Goethe-University Frankfurt.

Krueger, Dirk, and Alexander Ludwig (2007) “On the Consequences of Demographic

Change for Rates of Returns to Capital, and the Distribution of Wealth and Welfare,” Journal

of Monetary Economics 54(1): 49–87.

Leigh, Nancey Green and Benjamin Kraft (2016) “Local Economic Development and

the Geography of the Robotics Industry,” Mimeo, Georgia Tech.

Lewis, Ethan (2011) “Immigration, Skill Mix, and Capital Skill Complementarity,” The

Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(2): 1029–1069.

Ludwig, Alexander, Thomas Schelkle, and Edgar Vogel (2012) “Demographic

Change, Human Capital and Welfare,” Review of Economic Dynamics 15(1): 94–107.

Manuelli, Rodolfo E., and Ananth Seshadri (2014) “Frictionless Technology Diffusion:

The Case of Tractors,” American Economic Review 104(4): 1368–91.

Michaels, Guy, Ashwini Natraj and John Van Reenen (2014) “Has ICT Polarized

Skill Demand? Evidence from Eleven Countries over Twenty-Five Years,”Review of Economics

and Statistics, 96(1): 60–77.

Murphy, Kevin M. and Finis Welch (1990) “Empirical Age-Earnings Profiles” Journal

of Labor Economics, H(2), 202-229.

Poterba, James M (2001) “Demographic Structure and Asset Returns,” The Review of

Economics and Statistics 83(4): 565–584.

Ruggles, Steven, Matthew Sobek, Trent Alexander, Catherine A. Fitch, Ronald

Goeken, Patricia Kelly Hall, Miriam King, and Chad Ronnander (2010) “Integrated

Public Use Microdata Series: Version 3.0 [Machine-readable database].” Minneapolis, Minnesota

Population Center.

Storesletten, Kjetil (2000) “Sustaining Fiscal Policy through Immigration,” Journal of

Political Economy 108(2): 300–323.

Summers, Lawrence (2013) “Why Stagnation Might Prove to Be the New Normal” The

Financial Times.

Tolbert, Charles M., and Molly Sizer (1996) “US Commuting Zones and Labor Market

Areas: A 1990 Update.” Economic Research Service Staff Paper 9614.

Zeira, Joseph (1998) “Workers, Machines, and Economic Growth,” Quarterly Journal of

Economics, 113(4): 1091–1117.

40



Appendix: Omitted Proofs

Proof of Proposition 1

1. Existence and uniqueness of equilibrium.

Recall that C(W,V, P ) is the cost of producing one unit of aggregate output. Let PY (i)

denote the price of good Y (i) and PX(i) denote the price of X(i).

The Cobb-Douglas production function for Y (i) in equation (2) implies that

PY (i) = (1−η)η
η×(α(i)η)−α(i)η((1−α(i)η))−(1−α(i))η (1−η)−(1−η)PX(i)

α(i)ηV (1−α(i))ηPY (i)
1−η .

Solving for PY (i) yields equation (5). Equation (1) then implies

C(W,V, P ) =

(∫ 1

0
PY (i)

1−σ

) 1
1−σ

=

(∫ 1

0
λ(i)1−σPX(i)

α(i)(1−σ)V (1−α(i))(1−σ)
) 1

1−σ

,

where PX(i) is given in equation (8) in the main text.

The demand for labor from production and service tasks then follows from Shepherd’s Lemma

and takes the form

Ld =CW (W,V, P )
Y

2 − η
, Sd =CV (W,V, P )

Y

2 − η
,

where 2 − η in the denominator accounts for the intermediate goods, q(i), and the cost of

producing these goods.

From these equations, conditions (13) and (14) can be written as

1 =C(WE(φ,Θ), V E(φ,Θ), P ) (A1)

1− φ

φ
=
CW (W

E(φ,Θ), V E(φ,Θ), P )

CV (WE(φ,Θ), V E(φ,Θ), P )
. (A2)

We now show that, for any φ ∈ (0, 1) there is a unique pair {WE(φ,Θ), V E(φ,Θ)} that

solves (A1) and (A2).

Consider the iso-cost C(W,V, P ) = 1. The market equilibrium occurs at a point where the

tangent to this curve has slope − φ1−φ as shown in Figure 1.

Along this iso-cost, CW (W,V, P )/CV (W,V, P ) = 0 as
V
W

→ 0. To prove this, note that

CW (W,V, P )

CV (W,V, P )
=

V

W

∫
α(i)sL(i)λ(i)

1−σPX(i)
α(i)(1−σ)V (1−α(i))(1−σ)di∫

(1− α(i))λ(i)1−σPX(i)α(i)(1−σ)V (1−α(i))(1−σ)di
.

Letting αmin = inf i∈I α(i) and αmax = supi∈I α(i), we get

0 ≤
CW (W,V, P )

CV (W,V, P )
≤

V

W

αmax
1− αmin

∫
λ(i)1−σPX(i)

α(i)(1−σ)V (1−α(i))(1−σ)di∫
λ(i)1−σPX(i)α(i)(1−σ)V (1−α(i))(1−σ)di

=
V

W

αmax
1− αmin

.

41



Therefore, as V
W

→ 0, CW (W,V,P )
CV (W,V,P )

→ 0 (recall that αmin, αmax ∈ (0, 1)).

Likewise, along the iso-cost C(W,V, P ) = 1, CW (W,V, P )/CV (W,V, P ) = ∞ as
V
W

→ ∞.

Hence,

CW (W,V, P )

CV (W,V, P )
≥

V

W

αmin
1− αmax

[min
i∈I

sL(i)]

∫
λ(i)1−σPX(i)

α(i)(1−σ)V (1−α(i))(1−σ)di∫
λ(i)1−σPX(i)α(i)(1−σ)V (1−α(i))(1−σ)di

=
V

W

αmin
1− αmax

[min
i∈I

sL(i)].

Since V
W

→ ∞, W → 0 and so θA(i) = 0 for all tasks, which implies that sL(i) = 1 for all i.

Therefore, as V
W

→ ∞, we must have CW (W,V,P )
CV (W,V,P )

→ ∞.

Because CW (W,V, P )/CV (W,V, P ) = 0 as
V
W

→ 0 and CW (W,V, P )/CV (W,V, P ) = ∞ as
V
W

→ ∞, the intermediate value theorem implies that there exists WE(φ,Θ), V E(φ,Θ) along

the iso-cost that satisfies equation (A2). This establishes existence.

To prove uniqueness, note that C(W,V, P ) is jointly concave in W,V, and P , which im-

plies that the iso-cost curve C(W,V, P ) = 1 is convex. That is, along the curve C(W,V, P ) = 1,

CW /CV is decreasing inW and is increasing in V . Thus, there is a unique pairW
E(φ,Θ), V E(φ,Θ)

along the iso-cost that satisfies equation (A2).

Finally, aggregate output per worker is given by

yE(φ,Θ) = (2− η)
φ

CV (WE(φ,Θ), V E(φ,Θ), P )
,

while machinery per worker is given by

mE(φ,Θ) = φ
CP (W

E(φ,Θ), V E(φ,Θ), P )

CV (WE(φ,Θ), V E(φ,Θ), P )
;

and the threshold θA(i) can be computed from equation (7).�

2. Comparative statics with respect to φ.

Because the iso-cost curve C(W,V, P ) = 1 is convex, an increase in φ raises WE(φ,Θ) and

reduces V E(φ,Θ).

To complete the proof, we derive the formula for yEφ (φ,Θ) given in the main text. National

income accounting implies

1

2− η
yE(φ,Θ) = φV E(φ,Θ) + (1− φ)WE(φ,Θ) +mE(φ,Θ)P, (A3)

where the 12−η accounts for the intermediate goods, q(i), and the cost of producing these goods.

Differentiating this expression with respect to φ, we obtain

ηyEφ (φ,Θ) = V
E(φ,Θ)−WE(φ,Θ) +mEφ (φ,Θ)P + φV

E
φ (φ,Θ) + (1− φ)W

E
φ (φ,Θ).

Next differentiating C(W,V, P ) = 1 with respect to φ, and recalling that CW
CV

= 1−φ
φ

, we obtain

φV Eφ (φ,Θ) + (1 − φ)W
E
φ (φ,Θ) = 0. Substituting this into the previous expression, we obtain

(15).�

42



Proof of Proposition 2

Part 1: Suppose that φ ≤ φ′ and take an i ∈ I+(φ,A), so that W
E(φ,Θ)
A(i) > P . Proposition

1 implies WE(φ,Θ) ≤ WE(φ′,Θ), and thus W
E(φ′,Θ)
A(i) > P and i

′ ∈ I+(φ′, A). Therefore

I+(φ,Θ) ⊆ I+(φ′, A).

Part 2: LetWP (φ,A) denote the middle-aged wage that would result if θ(i) = 0 and there were

no automation technologies. From Proposition 1, we can conclude immediately that WP (φ,A)

is increasing in φ, WP (φ,A) → 0 when φ → 0, and WP (φ,A) → ∞ when φ → ∞. Then define

φ̃(A) as the maximum level of φ such that WP (φ,A) ≤ A(i)P for almost all i. For φ ≤ φ̃(A), we

have that the unique equilibrium is given by θ(i) = 0 for almost all i and WP (φ,A) = WE(φ,Θ).

Thus, for φ ≤ φ̃(A), the set I+(φ,A) has measure zero.

For φ > φ̃(A), we have WE(φ,Θ) > WE(φ̃(A),Θ) = WP (φ,A). Thus, the equilibrium must

involve a positive measure of industries that are adopting automation technologies. That is,

WE(φ,Θ) > WP (φ,A) ≥ A(i)P and θA(i) = θ(i) for a positive measure of industries.�

Proof of Proposition 3

We first state and prove the following lemma.

Lemma A2 Suppose that for almost all industries

π(i) < π =
1

σ

1− αmax
αmax

.

Then dθ(i) > 0 for a positive measure subset of industries in I+(φ,Θ) leads to a lower W .

Proof. Let χ(i) denote the share of expenditure going to industry i, χL(i) the share of payments

to middle-aged workers going to those in industry i, and χS(i) the share of payments to senior

workers going to those in industry i. Finally, let sL(i) denote the labor share of production tasks

in industry i.

We have

dθA(i) =

{
dθ(i) if i ∈ I+(φ,Θ)

0 otherwise.

Following dθ(i) > 0, we have

d lnPX(i) = sL(i)d lnW −
sL(i)

1− θA(i)
π(i)dθA(i).

Using this expression, and taking log-derivatives of the equilibrium conditions, we obtain:

• From the ideal price condition, (13):

d lnV

∫

i∈I
χ(i)(1 − α(i))di

+d lnW

∫

i∈I
χ(i)α(i)sL(i)di =

∫

i∈I
χ(i)α(i)

sL(i)

1 − θA(i)
π(i)dθA(i)di; (A5)

43



• From the demand for middle-aged workers, (10):

0 = d ln Y − d lnW

∫

i∈I
χL(i)(ζ − (ζ − 1)sL(i))di

+ d lnW

∫

i∈I
χL(i)(1 − σ)α(i)sL(i)di + d lnV

∫

i∈I
χL(i)(1 − σ)(1− α(i))di

−

∫

i∈I
χL(i)(α(i)(1 − σ) + ζ − 1)

sL(i)

1 − θA(i)
π(i)dθA(i)di

−

∫

i∈I
χL(i)

dθA(i)

1 − θA(i)
; (A6)

• From the demand for senior workers, (12):

0 = d lnY − d lnV

+ d lnW

∫

i∈I
χS(i)((1 − σ)α(i)sL(i)di + d lnV

∫

i∈I
χS(i)(1 − σ)(1− α(i)di

−

∫

i∈I
χS(i)α(i)(1 − σ)

sL(i)

1− θA(i)
π(i)dθA(i)di. (A7)

Using equations (A5), (A6), and (A7), we can solve for d lnW and d lnS as

d lnW =
1

Λ

[
(σ − 1)

∫

i∈I
(χL(i)− χS(i))α(i)

sL(i)

1 − θA(i)
π(i)dθA(i)di

− (ζ − 1)

∫

i∈I
χL(i)

sL(i)

1− θA(i)
π(i)dθA(i)di −

∫

i∈I
χL(i)

dθA(i)

1 − θA(i)

+

[
1 + (σ − 1)

∫
i∈I(χL(i)− χS(i))α(i)di

]
∫
i∈I χ(i)(1 − α(i))

∫

i∈I
χ(i)α(i)

sL(i)

1 − θA(i)
π(i)dθA(i)di.

]
, (A8)

where35

Λ =

[∫

i∈I
χL(i)(ζ − (ζ − 1)sL(i))di + (σ − 1)

∫

i∈I
(χL(i)− χS(i))α(i)sL(i)di

]

+

[
1 + (σ − 1)

∫

i∈I
(χL(i)− χS(i))α(i)di

] ∫
i∈I χ(i)α(i)sL(i)di∫
i∈I χ(i)(1 − α(i))

> 0.

Note that, because ζ > σ, we have

(ζ − 1)

∫

i∈I
χL(i)

sL(i)

1− θA(i)
π(i)dθA(i)di > (σ− 1)

∫

i∈I
(χL(i)− χS(i))α(i)

sL(i)

1 − θA(i)
π(i)dθA(i)di.

35The fact that Λ > 0 is equivalent to C(V,W,P ) being strictly quasi-concave in {V,W }. In particular, Λ > 0

if and only if

CWWC
2
V + CV V C

2
W − 2CWV CV CW < 0,

which corresponds to the determinant of the bordered Hessian of C(V,W,P ) (holding P constant)

H =




0 CW CV

CW CWW CWV

CV CWV CV V




being positive. Since C(V,W,P ) is strictly concave in its first two arguments, we always have Λ > 0.

44



In addition, we also have

1 + (σ − 1)

∫

i∈I
(χL(i)− χS(i))α(i)di < σ.

Using equation (A8) and these two inequalities, we have

d lnW <
1

Λ

[
−

∫

i∈I
χL(i)

dθA(i)

1 − θA(i)
+

σ∫
i∈I χ(i)(1 − α(i))

∫

i∈I
χ(i)α(i)

sL(i)

1 − θA(i)
π(i)dθA(i)di.

]
.

The last inequality shows that the condition

σ∫
i∈I χ(i)(1 − α(i))

χ(i)α(i)sL(i)π(i) < χL(i)

is sufficient to ensure d lnW < 0. This condition can be rewritten as

π(i) <
1

σ

χL(i)
∫
i∈I χ(i)(1 − α(i))

χ(i)α(i)sL(i)
=

1

σ

∫
i∈I χ(i)(1 − α(i))di∫
i∈I χ(i)α(i)sL(i)di

,

where we have used the fact that χL(i) =
χ(i)α(i)sL(i)∫

i∈I
χ(i)α(i)sL(i)di

.

This follows because
1

σ

1− αmax
αmax

<
1

σ

∫
i∈I χ(i)(1 − α(i))di∫
i∈I χ(i)α(i)sL(i)di

.

With this lemma at hand, we now turn to the proof of the proposition.

1. Impact of an increase in automation.

The definition of φ̃(A) implies that for φ < φ̃(A), we have θA(i) = 0. Therefore, changes

in automation technologies do not lead to their adoption and there is no impact on equilibrium

wages.

For φ > φ̃(A), automation has an ambiguous effect on W as shown in equation (A8). Turning

to V , we have

d lnV =d lnW

∫
i∈I χL(i)(ζ − (ζ − 1)sL(i))di + (σ − 1)

∫
i∈I(χL(i)− χS(i))α(i)sL(i)di

1 + (σ − 1)
∫
i∈I(χL(i)− χS(i))α(i)di

+

∫

i∈I
χL(i)

dθA(i)

1− θA(i)

+ (ζ − 1)

∫

i∈I
χL(i)

sL(i)

1− θA(i)
π(i)dθA(i)di

− (σ − 1)

∫

i∈I
(χL(i)− χS(i))α(i)

sL(i)

1 − θA(i)
π(i)dθA(i)di

>d lnW +

∫

i∈I
χL(i)

dθA(i)

1− θA(i)
.

Here we used the fact that, because ζ > σ, we have
∫
i∈I χL(i)(ζ − (ζ − 1)sL(i))di > 1, and

(ζ − 1)

∫

i∈I
χL(i)

sL(i)

1− θA(i)
π(i)dθA(i)di > (σ− 1)

∫

i∈I
(χL(i)− χS(i))α(i)

sL(i)

1 − θA(i)
π(i)dθA(i)di.

45



This inequality implies that d ln V > d lnW , and W/V declines with automation. Moreover,

substituting for d ln V > d lnW in equation (A5), we get

d ln V

∫

i∈I
χ(i)(1 − α(i))di

+d lnV

∫

i∈I
χ(i)α(i)sL(i)di >

∫

i∈I
χ(i)α(i)

sL(i)

1 − θA(i)
π(i)dθA(i)di,

which implies d lnV > 0.

Finally, because WE(φ,Θ) is increasing in φ, cost savings from automation for industry

i ∈ I+(φ,Θ), π(i), are also increasing in φ. Therefore, there exists a threshold φ(Θ) > φ̃(A)

such that π(i) < π for almost all industries.

2. Impact of an increase in labor-augmenting technologies. To be completed.

Proof of Lemma 1

Part 1: The first-order conditions directly follow by differentiating equation (16).

Part 2: Supermodularity of profits in (16) in W , θ(i) and −A(i) can be verified directly from

the first-order conditions in equations (19) and (20). This supermodularity then ensures that

θR(W, i) is nondecreasing in W , while AR(W, i) is non-increasing in W .

Part 3: Because θR(W, i) is non-decreasing in W and θR(W, i) ≥ 0, and because AR(W, i) is

non-increasing in W and AR(W, i), there exist θ and A such that limW→0 θ
R(W, i) = θ and

limW→0A
R(W, i) = A.

We now show that θ = 0. Taking the limit of the first-order condition for θR(W, i) in equation

(19) as W → 0 we get

h(θ) ≥ lim
W→0

(σ − 1)α(i)ρ(i)
sL(i)

(1 − θ)

1

ζ − 1

[(
W

AP

)ζ−1
− 1

]
= 0,

but this condition can only hold for θ = 0.

Also, plugging θ = 0 in the first-order condition for AR(W, i) in equation (20), we can

conclude that

g(A) = lim
W→0

(σ − 1)α(i)µ(i)sL(i)
1

A
= (σ − 1)α(i)µ(i)

1

A
,

which implies A = Ã(i). �

Proof of Proposition 4

To prove the existence of an equilibrium we analyze the properties of the functionWE(φ,ΘR(W ))

when W = 0 and W → ∞.

Part 3 of Lemma 1 shows that for W → 0, we have that θR(W, i) = 0 and AR(W, i) = Ã(i).

Thus, WE(φ,ΘR(0)) > 0.

46



In addition, as W increases, both θR(W, i) and AR(W, i) converge to some finite values

(the former is nondecreasing and bounded above by one, and the latter is nonincreasing and

bonded below by zero). Thus, WE(φ,ΘR(W )) converges to a finite limit. This implies that

the curve WE(φ,ΘR(W )) starts above the 45 degree line and ends below it. Thus, there exists

at least one solution to W = WE(φ,ΘR(W )). This establishes existence. If there are multiple

intersections, the smallest and the largest give the least and the greatest equilibria in view of

the supermodularity established in Lemma 1.�

Proof of Proposition 5

Both parts of this proposition follow directly from Topkis’s Monotonicity theorem (Topkis, 1998)

since, from Proposition 1, an increase in φ shifts the mapWE(φ,ΘR(W )) up (as shown in Figures

3 and 4). �

Proof of Proposition 6

To economize on space, we prove this proposition only for the case in which technology choices are

differentiable and thus we can apply the implicit function theorem. The proof in the more general

case has a similar idea, but also explicitly allows for the equilibrium to change discontinuously.

The first-order condition for a monopolist that chooses an interior solution for θ(i) is given

by:

h(θR(W, i)) = (σ − 1)α(i)ρ(i)
sL(i)

1 − θ(i)
π(i),

where π(i) > 0. The implicit function theorem implies that we can differentiate this expression

to obtain:

dθR(W, i) =
(ζ − 1)h(θR(W, i)) + (σ−1)α(i)ρ(i)

1−θR(W,i)

h′R(W, i)) + ζ−1(σ−1)α(i)ρ(i)h(θ
R(W, i))2

sL(i)
[
d lnW − d lnAR(W, i)

]
. (A9)

This expression shows that, for industries in I+(φ,Θ), the (semi) elasticity of θR(W, i) with

respect to effective wages (given by W/A(i)) is

Γ(α(i)ρ(i)) =
(ζ − 1)h(θR(W, i)) + (σ−1)α(i)ρ(i)

1−θR(W,i)

h′R(W, i)) + ζ−1(σ−1)α(i)ρ(i)h(θ
R(W, i))2

sL(i) > 0.

The first-order condition for a technology monopolist that chooses an interior solution for

A(i) is:

g(AR(W, i))AR(W, i) = (σ − 1)α(i)µ(i)sL(i).

The implicit function theorem implies that we can differentiate this expression to obtain:

(1 + εg + (1− ζ)(1− sL(i)))d lnA
R(W, i) =− (1 + (ζ − 1)sL(i)π(i))

dθR(W, i)

1 − θR(W, i)

− (ζ − 1)(1 − sL(i))d lnW (A10)

47



(where recall that εg is the elasticity of the g function with respect to A).

Using equations (A9) and (A10), we obtain:

dθR(W, i)

d lnW
=

(1 + εg)Γ(α(i)ρ(i))

1 + εg + (1− ζ)(1− sL(i)) −
1

1−θR(W,i)
Γ(α(i)ρ(i)) [1 + (ζ − 1)sL(i)π(i)]

,

which then implies that

Γi =
(1 + εg)Γ(α(i)ρ(i))

1 + εg + (1− ζ)(1− sL(i))−
1

1−θR(W,i)
Γ(α(i)ρ(i)) [1 + (ζ − 1)sL(i)π(i)]

> 0.

The denominator in this expression coincides with the determinant of the Hessian matrix

associated with the monopolist problem. Because the monopolist maximizes profits, this deter-

minant is positive, and Γi > 0.

The results then follows by observing that the (semi-) elasticity Γ(α(i)ρ(i)) is increasing in

α(i)ρ(i), which implies that Γi is increasing in α(i)ρ(i). �.

Proof of Proposition 7

We have that Y (i)∗ = Y ∗PY (i)
−σ . Taking a log-derivative of this expression we get

d lnY (i)∗

dφ
=
d ln Y ∗

dφ
− σα(i)sL(i)

d lnW ∗

dφ
− σ(1− α(i))

d ln V ∗

dφ

+ σα(i)
sL(i)

1 − θ(i)∗
π(i)

dθR(W, i)

dφ
+ σα(i)sL(i)

d lnAR(W, i)

dφ
.

Equation (A10) shows that, as εg → ∞,
d lnAR(W,i)

dφ
→ 0. In this limit case, we have

d lnY (i)∗

dφ
=
d ln Y ∗

dφ
− σα(i)sL(i)

d lnW ∗

dφ
− σ(1− α(i))

d ln V ∗

dφ

+ σα(i)
sL(i)

1 − θ(i)∗
π(i)Γ(α(i)ρ(i))

d lnW ∗

dφ
.

The term σα(i) sL(i)1−θ(i)∗ π(i)Γ(α(i)ρ(i))
d lnW ∗

dφ
captures the productivity benefits to industry i aris-

ing from the endogenous response of automation. Because of the term Γ(α(i)ρ(i)), theses pro-

ductivity benefits are larger for industries with a larger ρ(i), which implies that aging raises

output in industries with a greater ρ(i) relative industries with lower ρ(i). Because the elastici-

ties Γi and
d lnAR(W,i)

d lnW are smooth in εg, there exists ε̄g < ∞ such that, for εg < ε̄g, aging raises

output in industries with a greater ρ(i) relative industries with lower ρ(i). �.

Additional References:

Donald M. Topkis (1998) Supermodularity and Complementarity, Princeton University Press.

48



Main Figures and Tables:

0
5

10
15

20
R
ob

ot
s 

p
er

 t
h
ou

sa
n
d
 w

or
ke

rs

1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
 

All countries OECD countries United States Germany South Korea

Figure 5: Worldwide trends in robot adoption from the IFR.

.2
.4

.6
.8

1
R
at

io
 o

f 
se

n
io

r 
to

 m
id

d
le

-a
ge

d
 w

or
ke

rs

1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025
 

All countries OECD countries United States Germany South Korea

Figure 6: Worldwide aging trends using UN data on population by age groups and forecasts

of demographic change.

49



0
1

2
3

4
D

en
si
ty

 i
n
 1

99
0

20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90
age

US population Employed

Employed in highly robotized industries Blue-collar workers in highly robotized industries

0
1

2
3

4
D

en
si
ty

 i
n
 2

00
0

20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90
age

US population Employed

Employed in highly robotized industries Blue-collar workers in highly robotized industries

0
1

2
3

D
en

si
ty

 i
n
 2

00
7

20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90
age

US population Employed

Employed in highly robotized industries Blue-collar workers in highly robotized industries

Figure 7: U.S. age distribution among the population, employees, and employees in highly

robotized industries. The top panel presents the age distributions for 1990. The middle panel

presents the age distributions for 2000. The bottom panel presents the age distributions for

2007.

50



-1
.5

-1
-.
5

0
.5

P
oi

n
t 

es
ti
m

at
e

 16-25 26-35 36-45 46-55 56-65  

Baseline estimates Removing highly exposed areas Pooled model

Employment rates

-3
-2

-1
0

1
P
oi

n
t 

es
ti
m

at
e

 16-25 26-35 36-45 46-55 56-65  

Baseline estimates Removing highly exposed areas Pooled model

Log of wages

Figure 8: Estimated impact of one additional robot per thousand workers on employment and

wages. The figure plots the estimates for different age groups and for men separately.

51



ARG

AUT

AUS

BELBGR
BRA

CHE

CHN
COL

CZE

DEUDNK

EST

EGY

ESP

FIN

FRA

GRC

HKGHUN
ISL

IDN

IRL

ISR

IND

ITA

KOR

MAR
MDA MACMYS

USA

NLD

NOR

NZL

PER

PHL

PAK

POL

PRT

CHL

ROM

SWE SGP

SVK

SVN

THA
TUR

UKR

GBR

VEN
VNM

0
.2

.4
.6

.8

In
cr

ea
se

 i
n
 r

ob
ot

s 
p
er

 t
h
ou

sa
n
d

w
or

ke
rs

 f
ro

m
 1

99
3 

to
 2

01
4 

(a
n
n
u
al

iz
ed

)

0 .2 .4 .6
Aging from 1990 to 2025

Full sample of countries

AUT

AUS

BEL

CHE

CZE

DEU
DNK

EST

ESP

FIN

FRA

GRC

HUN

ISL

IRL

ISR

ITA

KOR

USA
NLD

NOR

NZL

POL

PRT

CHL

SWE

SVK

SVN

TUR
GBR

0
.2

.4
.6

.8

In
cr

ea
se

 i
n
 r

ob
ot

s 
p
er

 t
h
ou

sa
n
d

w
or

ke
rs

 f
ro

m
 1

99
3 

to
 2

01
4 

(a
n
n
u
al

iz
ed

)

.1 .2 .3 .4 .5
Aging from 1990 to 2025

OECD countries

Figure 9: Residual plots of the relationship between aging (change in the ratio of workers above

56 to workers between 21 and 55 between 1990 and 2025) and the increase in the number of

industrial robots per thousand workers from 1993 to 2014. The plots partial out the covariates

included in the regression models in Columns 3 and 6 of Table 4.

52



ARG

AUT

AUS

BEL

BGR

BRA

CHE

CHN

COL

CZE

DEU
DNK

EST

EGY

ESP

FIN

FRA

GRC

HKG

HUN
ISL

IDN

IRL

ISR

IND

ITA

KOR

MAR
MDA

MAC
MYS

USA

NLD

NOR

NZL

PER

PHL

PAK

POL

PRT

CHL

ROM
SWE

SGP
SVK

SVN

THA TUR

UKR

GBR

VEN
VNM

0
.1

.2
.3

.4
.5

.6

In
cr

ea
se

 i
n
 r

ob
ot

s 
p
er

 t
h
ou

sa
n
d

w
or

ke
rs

 f
ro

m
 1

99
3 

to
 2

01
4 

(a
n
n
u
al

iz
ed

)

-.1 0 .1 .2 .3
Change in the ratio of old to middle-aged workers from 1950 to 1990

Full sample of countries

AUT

AUS

BEL

CHE

CZE

DEU

DNK

EST

ESP

FIN

FRA

GRC

HUN

ISL

IRL

ISRITA

KOR

USA
NLD

NOR

NZL

POL

PRT

CHL

SWE

SVK

SVN

TUR
GBR

0
.1

.2
.3

.4
.5

.6

In
cr

ea
se

 i
n
 r

ob
ot

s 
p
er

 t
h
ou

sa
n
d

w
or

ke
rs

 f
ro

m
 1

99
3 

to
 2

01
4 

(a
n
n
u
al

iz
ed

)

-.1 0 .1 .2 .3
Change in the ratio of old to middle-aged workers from 1950 to 1990

OECD countries

Figure 10: Residual plots of the relationship between past aging (change in the ratio of workers

above 56 to workers between 21 and 55 between 1950 and 1990) and the increase in the number

of industrial robots per thousand workers from 1993 to 2014. The plots partial out the covariates

included in the regression models in Columns 4 (top panel) and 9 (bottom panel) of Panel A in

Table 5.

53



ARG

AUS

AUT

BLR

BIH BRABGRCHL CHN
MACCOL

HRV

CZEDNK

EGY

EST

FIN

FRA

GRC

HUN

ISL

IND
IDNIRN

IRLISR ITA

KWT
LVALTU

MYS

MLT

MAR

NLD

NZL

NOR

OMNPAKPERPHL

POL

PRT

QAT
MDA

ROU

SAUSRB

SVK
SVN

ZAF

ESP

SWE

CHE

THATUN

TUR

UKR

ARE

GBR

USA

VENVNM

0
50

00
0

10
00

00
15

00
00

20
00

00
D

ol
la

r 
va

lu
e 

of
 r

ob
ot

 i
m

p
or

ts
 p

er
 t

h
ou

sa
n
d
 w

or
ke

rs

0 .5 1 1.5 2
Change in the stock of robots per thousand workers from 1993 to 2014

ARG

AUS

AUT

BLR

BIH BRABGRCHL CHN

MAC
COL

HRV

CZEDNK

EGY

EST

FIN
FRA

GRC

HUNISL

IND

IDNIRN

IRLISR ITA

KWT

LVA LTU

MYSMLT

MAR

NLD

NZL

NOR

OMNPER
PHL

POL
PRT

QAT

MDA

ROU

SAUSRB

SVKSVN

ZAF

ESP
SWECHE

THATUN

TUR

UKR

ARE

GBR
USA

VEN VNM

0
5

10
15

lo
g 

of
 d

ol
la

r 
va

lu
e 

of
 r

ob
ot

 i
m

p
or

ts
p
er

 t
h
ou

sa
n
d
 w

or
ke

rs

-6 -4 -2 0 2
log of installations of industrial robots from 1993-2014

per thousand workers

Figure 11: Plots of the relationship between the change in the stock of robots provided by the

IFR (horizontal axis) and the total dollar value of imports of industrial robots from Comtrade

(vertical axis).

54



AGO

ALB

ARE

ARG ARM

AUS

AUT

BDI

BEN
BFA

BGD

BGR
BHR

BLZ

BOL

BRA

BRB
BRN

BWA
CAN

CHE

CHL

CHN

CIV

CMR

COG

COL

CRI

CYP
CZE

DNK

DOM

DZA
ECU

EGY
ESP

EST

ETH

FINFJI

FRA

GAB
GBR

GHA GRC
GTM

HND

HRV
HUN

IDNIND

IRL

IRN

ISL

ISR

ITA

JAM

JOR

KAZ

KEN

KGZ

KHM

KWT

LKA

LSO

LTULVA

MAC

MAR

MDA

MDG MEX

MLI

MLT

MMR

MNG

MOZ

MRT

MUS

MWI

MYS

NAM

NER

NGA
NIC NLD

NOR

NPL

NZL

PAK PAN

PER

PHL

POL

PRT

PRY

QAT

ROU

RUS

RWA
SAU

SDN

SEN

SLV

SRBSVK
SVN

SWE

SWZ

SYR

TGO

THA

TTO

TUN

TUR

UGA

UKR

URY

USA

VEN

VNM

YEM

ZAF

ZMB

ZWE

-1
4

-1
2

-1
0

-8
-6

-4

Im
p
or

ts
 o

f 
in

d
u
st

ri
al

 r
ob

ot
s

re
la

ti
ve

 t
o 

in
te

rm
ed

ia
te

s

-.2 0 .2 .4 .6
Aging from 1990 to 2025

Figure 12: Residual plot of the relationship between aging (change in the ratio of workers above

56 to workers between 21 and 55 between 1990 and 2025) and the log of imports of industrial

robots from 1990 to 2016 (relative to total imports of intermediates). The plot partials out the

covariates included in the regression models in Column 1 of Table 9.

55



Winston-Salem city, NC

Greensboro city, NC
Spartanburg city, SC

Charlotte city, NC

Raleigh city, NC

Kosciusko city, MS
Greenwood city, MS

Greenville city, MS

Nashville-Davidson (remain, TN
Cookeville city, TN

Sarasota city, FL

Cape Coral city, FL

Greenville city, SC

Atlanta city, GA

Birmingham city, AL

Detroit city, MI

Saginaw city, MI

Grand Rapids city, MI

Dayton city, OH

Cincinnati city, OH

Louisville city, KYIndianapolis city (remaind, IN
Cleveland city, OH

Columbus city, OH

Pittsburgh city, PA

Charlottesville city, VA

Buffalo city, NY

Allentown city, PA

Harrisburg city, PA

Poughkeepsie city, NY

Brick Township CDP, NJ

Philadelphia city, PA

Wilmington city, DE
Burlington city, VT

Nantucket CDP, MA
Vineyard Haven CDP, MA

Boston city, MA

Minneapolis city, MN

Rochester city, MN

Sheboygan city, WI

Davenport city, IA
Milwaukee city, WIChicago city, IL

Springfield city, IL

Mobridge city, SD

Fergus Falls city, MN

Winner city, SDChamberlain city, SD
Pierre city, SD

Gettysburg city, SD
North Eagle Butte CDP, SD
Philip city, SD

Murdo city, SD

Rosebud CDP, SD

Fort Collins city, CO

Marysville city, KS

Manhattan city, KS

Columbia city, MO
Tulsa city, OK

Crystal City city, TX

Laredo city, TX

Brownsville city, TX

Bryan city, TX

Houston city, TX

Uvalde city, TXDel Rio city, TXEagle Pass city, TX

Dallas city, TX

Oklahoma City city, OKSanta Fe city, NM

Gallup city, NMSt. George city, UTPrice city, UT

Richfield city, UT

Loa town, UT

Provo city, UT

Logan city, UT

Salmon city, ID
Quincy-East Quincy CDP, CA

San Francisco city, CA

Mammoth Lakes town, CA

Los Angeles city, CA

Spokane city, WA

Port Angeles city, WA

-1
0

1
2

3
lo

g 
of

 o
n
e 

p
lu

s 
n
u
m

b
er

 o
f 
in

te
gr

at
or

s

.05 .1 .15 .2 .25 .3 .35
Predicted aging from 1990 to 2015

Commuting zones

Figure 13: Visual IV plot of the relationship between predicted aging (change in the ratio of

workers above 56 to workers between 21 and 55 between 1990 and 2015, instrumented using the

age composition of a commuting zone in 1990) and the location of robot integrators in the US

(from Leigh and Kraft, 2016). The plots partial out the covariates included in the regression

models in Column 4 in Table 10.

56



Table 1: Summary statistics for countries

All

countries
OECD

Rapidly-

aging

countries

Slowly-

aging

countries

IFR sample:

Robots per thousand workers in 2014 3.79 5.71 5.76 1.81

(4.60) (4.83) (5.29) (2.64)

Robots per thousand workers in 1993 0.72 1.14 1.09 0.34

(1.13) (1.22) (1.24) (0.87)

Annualized increase from 1993 to 2014 0.15 0.22 0.22 0.07

(0.18) (0.19) (0.21) (0.09)

Robot installations per year (1993-2014) 0.24 0.36 0.37 0.10

(0.31) (0.32) (0.36) (0.18)

Ratio of old to middle-aged workers 0.38 0.45 0.41 0.34

in 1990 (0.13) (0.09) (0.12) (0.14)

Change in old to middle-aged workers 0.26 0.31 0.37 0.16

from 1990 to 2025 (0.13) (0.11) (0.09) (0.07)

Change in old to middle-aged workers 0.13 0.16 0.19 0.08

from 1990 to 2015 (0.08) (0.06) (0.05) (0.08)

N = 52 N = 30 N = 26 N = 26

Comtrade sample:

Dollar value of robot imports from 1996 24.6K 93.7K 44.6K 4.4K

to 2015 per thousand workers (45.9K) (56.0K) (56.8K) (13.7K)

Change in old to middle-aged workers 0.15 0.29 0.27 0.03

from 1990 to 2025 (0.15) (0.09) (0.10) (0.06)

N = 145 N = 30 N = 73 N = 72

Notes: The table presents summary statistics for the main variables used in our cross country analysis. The data

are presented separately for all countries, OECD countries, and countries above and below the median aging

from 1990 to 2025. Section 3 in the main text describes the sources and data in detail.

57



Table 2: Summary statistics for industries

Robot installations per

thousand workers

Percent

increase

US ratio

middle-aged

Replacea-

bility index

Employment

Klems

Employment

Unido

in value

added

to old

workers

Graetz and

Michaels

Prone to the use of robots:

Automotive 7.62 5.01 54.6% 7.78 .

Electronics 0.75 0.67 54.2% 8.10 .

Metal machinery 0.45 0.41 49.7% 6.79 .

Metal products 1.14 0.84 43.4% 6.44 .

Plastic, Chemicals, and Pharmaceuticals 1.30 1.15 39.8% 8.15 .

Other manufacturing:

Food and Beverages 0.46 0.30 30.7% 7.80 .

Furniture 0.38 0.09 38.5% 7.78 .

Glass and Ceramics 0.26 0.13 52.4% 6.94 .

Basic metals 0.49 0.29 56.3% 6.13 .

Paper and printing 0.05 0.03 33.8% 7.10 .

Textiles and leather 0.07 0.03 34.1% 5.88 .

Other vehicles 0.30 0.15 61.8% 6.48 .

Other manufacturing industries 0.37 . 37.2% 6.34 .

Nonmanufacturing:

Agriculture 0.02 . 21.6% 3.85 .

Construction 0.01 . 41.6% 8.08 .

Education 0.04 . 34.4% 5.94 .

Mining 0.09 . 61.0% 8.52 .

Other nonmanufacturing industries 0.00 . 38.3% 6.91 .

Utilities 0.01 . 52.3% 8.04 .

Average 0.22 0.59 38.5% 6.92 0.24

Interquantile range 0.45 0.65 19.8% 1.66 0.27

Standard deviation (0.95) (1.03) (11.2%) (1.13) (0.14)

Countries 22 50 22 US US

Country*years 312 542 . . .

Notes: The table presents summary statistics for each of the 19 industries covered in the IFR data. The bottom

rows present summary statistics for each variable over all these industries. The replaceability index is not

reported by industry, but can be obtained directly from Graetz and Michaels (2015). Section 3 in the main text

describes the sources and data in detail.

58



Table 3: OLS estimates of the impact of population change on the adoption of industrial robots.

Dependent variable:

Change in the stock of industrial robots per thousand workers (annualized)

Full sample OECD sample

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)

Panel A. Population in three age brackets

Change in the log of population ≤ 35 years 0.075 -0.048 -0.190 -0.054 -0.310 -0.315

from 1990 to 2025 (0.137) (0.208) (0.183) (0.158) (0.249) (0.217)

Change in the log of population between 36-55 years -0.640∗∗∗ -0.514∗ -0.369 -0.798∗∗∗ -0.428 -0.422

from 1990 to 2025 (0.197) (0.282) (0.242) (0.222) (0.307) (0.363)

Change in the log of population ≥ 56 years 0.461∗∗∗ 0.476∗∗ 0.184 0.746∗∗ 0.553∗ 0.434

from 1990 to 2025 (0.151) (0.177) (0.151) (0.271) (0.311) (0.279)

Baseline number of robots per thousand workers 0.061∗∗∗ 0.074∗∗

(0.020) (0.027)

Observations 52 52 52 30 30 30

R-squared 0.49 0.59 0.76 0.44 0.61 0.74

Panel B. Population in three age brackets

Change in the log of population 0.200 -0.246 -0.314 -0.011 0.376 0.124

from 1990 to 2025 (0.327) (0.619) (0.636) (0.657) (0.843) (0.877)

Change in the log of population between 21-35 years -0.021 0.072 -0.007 -0.372 -0.855 -0.684

from 1990 to 2025 (0.204) (0.332) (0.366) (0.301) (0.669) (0.640)

Change in the log of population between 36-55 years -0.737∗∗∗ -0.712∗∗ -0.442 -0.536∗∗∗ -0.691∗ -0.689∗

from 1990 to 2025 (0.243) (0.308) (0.285) (0.176) (0.331) (0.393)

Change in the log of population between 56-65 years 0.428∗∗ 0.824∗∗ 0.552∗ 0.701∗∗ 0.535 0.577

from 1990 to 2025 (0.212) (0.342) (0.316) (0.322) (0.555) (0.550)

Baseline number of robots per thousand workers 0.040∗ 0.048∗

(0.021) (0.027)

Observations 52 52 52 30 30 30

R-squared 0.48 0.57 0.71 0.50 0.64 0.75

Panel C. Population in two age brackets

Change in the log of population between 21-55 years -0.473∗∗∗ -0.641∗ -0.668∗∗ -0.756∗∗∗ -1.202∗∗ -1.170∗∗∗

from 1990 to 2025 (0.175) (0.366) (0.306) (0.213) (0.447) (0.399)

Change in the log of population > 55 years 0.339∗∗ 0.440∗∗ 0.343∗ 0.605∗∗ 0.478 0.473

from 1990 to 2025 (0.142) (0.217) (0.175) (0.237) (0.328) (0.306)

Baseline number of robots per thousand workers 0.049∗∗ 0.057∗∗

(0.020) (0.024)

Observations 52 52 52 30 30 30

R-squared 0.42 0.58 0.74 0.42 0.63 0.76

Covariates included:

Country covariates in 1990 X X X X

Initial robot density in 1993 X X

Notes: The dependent variable is change in the stock of industrial robots per thousand workers from 1993 to

2014 (from IFR). The explanatory variables include the (projected) change in the log of population in different

age groups between 1990 and 2025 (from the UN population statistics). Columns 1-3 use the full sample, while

columns 4-6 are for the OECD sample. Columns 1 and 4 include region dummies. Columns 2 and 5, in addition,

include the 1990 values of log GDP per capita, log of population, average years of schooling and the ratio of

workers above 56 to workers between 21 and 55. Columns 3 and 6 add the baseline (1993) value of robots per

thousand workers. All regressions are unweighted and the standard errors are robust against heteroscedasticity.

The coefficients with ∗∗∗ are significant at the 1% level, with ∗∗ are significant at the 5% level, and with ∗ are

significant at the 10% level.

59



Table 4: Estimates of the impact of aging on the adoption of industrial robots.

Dependent variable:

Change in the stock of industrial robots per thousand workers (annualized)

Full sample OECD sample

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)

Panel A. OLS estimates

Aging from 1990 to 2025 0.762∗∗∗ 0.651∗∗∗ 0.453∗∗ 1.117∗∗∗ 0.983∗∗∗ 0.667∗∗

(0.252) (0.221) (0.194) (0.366) (0.298) (0.240)

Ratio of senior to middle-aged workers in

1990
-0.177 -0.403 -0.339 -0.835∗

(0.295) (0.253) (0.471) (0.471)

Log of the GDP per capita in 1990 0.047 -0.011 0.037 -0.018

(0.035) (0.030) (0.052) (0.054)

Robots per thousand workers in 1993 0.047∗∗ 0.062∗∗

(0.023) (0.024)

Observations 52 52 52 30 30 30

R-squared 0.43 0.57 0.71 0.38 0.54 0.67

Panel B. IV estimates

Aging from 1990 to 2025 0.803∗∗∗ 0.672∗∗∗ 0.516∗∗∗ 1.576∗∗∗ 1.018∗∗∗ 0.807∗∗∗

(0.264) (0.203) (0.171) (0.473) (0.316) (0.271)

Ratio of senior to middle-aged workers in

1990
-0.180 -0.406∗ -0.337 -0.785∗∗

(0.264) (0.225) (0.413) (0.369)

Log of the GDP per capita in 1990 0.046 -0.015 0.036 -0.016

(0.033) (0.027) (0.047) (0.048)

Robots per thousand workers in 1993 0.046∗∗ 0.058∗∗

(0.020) (0.023)

Observations 52 52 52 30 30 30

Instruments F-stat 23.13 15.70 13.67 7.66 7.12 8.12

Overid p-value 0.79 0.49 0.10 0.75 0.34 0.04

Covariates included:

Country covariates in 1990 X X X X

Initial robot density in 1993 X X

Notes: The dependent variable is change in the stock of industrial robots per thousand workers from 1993 to 2014

(from IFR). The aging variable is the (projected) change in the ratio of workers above 56 to workers between 21

and 55 between 1990 and 2025 (from the UN Population Statistics). Panel A presents OLS estimates. Panel B

presents IV estimates where the aging variable is instrumented using the size of five-year birth cohorts between

1950 and 1985. Columns 1-3 use the full sample, while columns 4-6 are for the OECD sample. Columns 1 and

4 include region dummies. Columns 2 and 5, in addition, include the 1990 values of log GDP per capita, log of

population, average years of schooling and the ratio of workers above 56 to workers between 21 and 55. Columns

3 and 6 add the baseline (1993) value of robots per thousand workers. All regressions are unweighted and the

standard errors are robust against heteroscedasticity. The coefficients with ∗∗∗ are significant at the 1% level,

with ∗∗ are significant at the 5% level, and with ∗ are significant at the 10% level.

60



Table 5: OLS estimates of the impact of past and expected aging on the adoption of industrial

robots.

Dependent variable:

Change in the stock of industrial robots per thousand workers (annualized)

Full sample OECD sample

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)

Panel A. Placebo test

Aging from 1950 to 1990 -0.004 -0.097 0.187 -0.357 0.095 0.097

(0.265) (0.318) (0.224) (0.587) (0.456) (0.344)

Observations 52 52 52 30 30 30

R-squared 0.21 0.44 0.65 0.02 0.26 0.56

Panel B. Past vs. expected aging

Aging from 1950 to 1990 -0.261 -0.243 0.040 -0.243 0.192 0.176

(0.329) (0.324) (0.255) (0.436) (0.315) (0.331)

Aging from 1990 to 2025 0.795∗∗∗ 0.664∗∗∗ 0.450∗∗ 1.105∗∗∗ 0.988∗∗∗ 0.673∗∗

(0.263) (0.221) (0.198) (0.348) (0.306) (0.246)

Observations 52 52 52 30 30 30

R-squared 0.44 0.58 0.71 0.38 0.54 0.67

Panel C. Current vs. expected aging

Aging from 1990 to 2015 0.949∗∗∗ 0.636∗∗ 0.407 0.861∗∗ 0.688∗ 0.366

(0.350) (0.303) (0.304) (0.366) (0.347) (0.328)

Aging from 2015 to 2025 0.530 0.671 0.510 1.398∗∗ 1.320∗∗ 1.007∗

(0.385) (0.439) (0.423) (0.527) (0.564) (0.543)

Test for equality of coefficients 0.43 0.95 0.87 0.31 0.38 0.40

Observations 52 52 52 30 30 30

R-squared 0.43 0.57 0.71 0.38 0.55 0.68

Covariates included:

Country covariates in 1990 X X X X

Initial robot density in 1993 X X

Notes: The dependent variable is change in the stock of industrial robots per thousand workers from 1993 to

2014 (from IFR). In panel A, the aging variable is the past change in the ratio of workers above 56 to workers

between 21 and 55 between 1950 and 1990 (from the UN Population Statistics). In panel B we also include the

(projected) aging variable between 1990 and 2025 (from the UN Population Statistics). In panel C, we estimate

the impact of the aging variable between 1990 and 2015 and the projected aging between 2015 and 2025. Columns

1-3 use the full sample, while columns 4-6 are for the OECD sample. Columns 1 and 4 include region dummies.

Columns 2 and 5, in addition, include the 1990 values of log GDP per capita, log of population, average years

of schooling and the ratio of workers above 56 to workers between 21 and 55. Columns 3 and 6 add the baseline

(1993) value of robots per thousand workers. All regressions are unweighted and the standard errors are robust

against heteroscedasticity. The coefficients with ∗∗∗ are significant at the 1% level, with ∗∗ are significant at the

5% level, and with ∗ are significant at the 10% level.

61



Table 6: Stacked-differences estimates of the impact of aging on the adoption of industrial

robots.

Dependent variable:

Change in the stock of industrial robots per thousand workers (annualized)

Full sample OECD sample

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)

Panel A. OLS estimates

Aging during period 2.494∗∗∗ 1.583∗∗∗ 1.509∗∗ 2.907∗∗∗ 1.923∗∗∗ 1.905∗

(0.704) (0.483) (0.703) (1.020) (0.636) (1.019)

Observations 104 104 104 60 60 60

R-squared 0.32 0.55 0.08 0.18 0.46 0.10

Panel B. IV estimates

Aging during period 3.182∗∗∗ 2.116∗∗∗ 2.385∗ 4.486∗∗∗ 2.279∗∗∗ 2.827∗∗

(0.904) (0.649) (1.243) (1.547) (0.810) (1.402)

Observations 104 104 104 60 60 60

Countries in sample 52 52 52 30 30 30

Instruments F-stat 10.57 6.12 2.49 6.59 8.49 4.46

Overid p-value 0.41 0.15 0.22 0.64 0.26 0.37

Covariates included:

Country covariates in 1990 X X X X

Initial robot density in 1993 X X X X

Country trends X X

Notes: The dependent variable is the change in the stock of industrial robots per thousand workers for two

periods: from 1993 to 2005 and from 2005 to 2014 (from IFR). The aging variable is the contemporary change

in the ratio of workers above 56 to workers between 21 and 55 for each of these periods: between 1990 and 2005

and between 2005 and 2015 (from the UN Population Statistics). Panel A presents OLS estimates. Panel B

presents IV estimates where the aging variable is instrumented using the size of five-year birth cohorts between

1950 and 1985. Columns 1-3 use the full sample, while columns 4-6 are for the OECD sample. Columns 1 and

4 include region dummies. Columns 2 and 5, in addition, include the 1990 values of log GDP per capita, log

of population, average years of schooling, the ratio of workers above 56 to workers between 21 and 55, and the

baseline (1993) value of robots per thousand workers. Columns 3 and 6 include a full set of country fixed effects.

All regressions are unweighted and the standard errors are robust against heteroscedasticity. The coefficients with
∗∗∗ are significant at the 1% level, with ∗∗ are significant at the 5% level, and with ∗ are significant at the 10%

level.

62



Table 7: Estimates of the impact of aging, unions, and the wage level on the adoption of

industrial robots.

Dependent variable:

Change in the stock of industrial robots per thousand workers (annualized)

Full sample OECD sample

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)

Panel A. OLS estimates

Aging from 1990 to 2025 0.800∗∗∗ 0.782∗∗∗ 0.698∗∗ 1.240∗∗∗ 1.142∗∗∗ 0.860∗∗

(0.200) (0.204) (0.270) (0.343) (0.390) (0.356)

Baseline unionization rate 0.198 0.224∗ 0.203 0.416∗∗ 0.398∗∗ 0.263

(0.125) (0.118) (0.132) (0.177) (0.175) (0.193)

log of the hourly wage in 1993 0.178 0.145 0.144 0.036

(0.107) (0.127) (0.199) (0.206)

Robots per thousand workers in 1993 0.013 0.048∗

(0.038) (0.026)

Observations 38 38 38 30 30 30

R-squared 0.71 0.73 0.74 0.62 0.63 0.70

Panel B. IV estimates

Aging from 1990 to 2025 0.732∗∗∗ 0.706∗∗∗ 0.725∗∗∗ 1.389∗∗∗ 1.404∗∗∗ 1.261∗∗∗

(0.167) (0.162) (0.209) (0.333) (0.394) (0.365)

Baseline unionization rate 0.189∗ 0.215∗∗ 0.208∗∗ 0.459∗∗∗ 0.467∗∗∗ 0.386∗∗

(0.105) (0.097) (0.103) (0.165) (0.172) (0.172)

log of the hourly wage in 1993 0.181∗∗ 0.146 0.057 -0.051

(0.091) (0.102) (0.195) (0.198)

Robots per thousand workers in 1993 0.011 0.032

(0.029) (0.025)

Observations 38 38 38 30 30 30

Instruments F-stat 12.64 14.14 14.73 5.29 4.86 5.74

Overid p-value 0.10 0.15 0.06 0.47 0.42 0.18

Covariates included:

Country covariates in 1990 X X X X X X

Initial robot density in 1993 X X

Notes: The dependent variable is change in the stock of industrial robots per thousand workers from 1993 to 2014

(from IFR). The aging variable is the (projected) change in the ratio of workers above 56 to workers between 21

and 55 between 1990 and 2025 (from the UN Population Statistics). In addition, we also estimate the impact of

the baseline unionization rate (from the ILO) and wage level (from the Penn World Tables) in a country. Panel

A presents OLS estimates. Panel B presents IV estimates where the aging variable is instrumented using the

size of five-year birth cohorts between 1950 and 1985. Columns 1-3 use the full sample, while columns 4-6 are

for the OECD sample. All columns include region dummies, and the 1990 values of log GDP per capita, log of

population, average years of schooling and the ratio of workers above 56 to workers between 21 and 55. Columns

3 and 6 add the baseline (1993) value of robots per thousand workers. All regressions are unweighted and the

standard errors are robust against heteroscedasticity. The coefficients with ∗∗∗ are significant at the 1% level,

with ∗∗ are significant at the 5% level, and with ∗ are significant at the 10% level.

63



Table 8: Estimates of the impact of aging on robot installations per year.

Dependent variable:

Installations of industrial robots per thousand workers per year

Full sample OECD sample

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)

Panel A. OLS estimates

Aging from 1990 to 2025 1.228∗∗∗ 0.999∗∗∗ 0.538∗∗ 1.785∗∗∗ 1.519∗∗∗ 0.845∗∗∗

(0.395) (0.347) (0.231) (0.489) (0.427) (0.276)

Observations 1144 1144 1144 660 660 660

Countries in sample 52 52 52 30 30 30

R-squared 0.42 0.54 0.76 0.34 0.55 0.74

Panel B. IV estimates

Aging from 1990 to 2025 1.336∗∗∗ 0.931∗∗∗ 0.612∗∗∗ 2.619∗∗∗ 1.472∗∗∗ 1.042∗∗∗

(0.426) (0.332) (0.202) (0.533) (0.459) (0.314)

Observations 1144 1144 1144 660 660 660

Countries in sample 52 52 52 30 30 30

Instruments F-stat 26.59 18.36 16.14 9.67 9.45 11.14

Overid p-value 0.79 0.93 0.13 0.89 0.75 0.04

Covariates included:

Country covariates in 1990 X X X X

Initial robot density in 1993 X X

Notes: The dependent variable is installations of industrial robots per thousand workers for each country-year

pair between 1993 and 2014 (from IFR). The aging variable is the (projected) change in the ratio of workers

above 56 to workers between 21 and 55 between 1990 and 2025 (from the UN Population Statistics). Panel A

presents OLS estimates. Panel B presents IV estimates where the aging variable is instrumented using the size

of five-year birth cohorts between 1950 and 1985. Columns 1-3 use the full sample, while columns 4-6 are for

the OECD sample. Columns 1 and 4 include region dummies. Columns 2 and 5, in addition, include the 1990

values of log GDP per capita, log of population, average years of schooling and the ratio of workers above 56 to

workers between 21 and 55. Columns 3 and 6 add the baseline (1993) value of robots per thousand workers. All

regressions are unweighted and the standard errors are robust against heteroscedasticity and serial correlation

within countries. The coefficients with ∗∗∗ are significant at the 1% level, with ∗∗ are significant at the 5% level,

and with ∗ are significant at the 10% level.

64



Table 9: Estimates of the impact of aging on imports of intermediate goods.

Dependent variable: log of value of imports from 1990 to 2016 (normalized by intermediate imports)

Intermediate goods: Industrial robots

Numerically

controlled

machines

Weaving and

Knitting

machines

Vending

machines and

ATMS

Computers
Agricultural

machinery

Miscellaneous

tools

General

equipment

Increase in

Capital from

PWT

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9)

Panel A. OLS estimates

Aging from 1990 to 2025 3.492∗∗ 2.296∗∗∗ 3.042∗ 2.442∗∗∗ 1.724∗∗∗ -0.939 0.500 0.835∗ 0.676∗∗∗

(1.342) (0.756) (1.668) (0.716) (0.527) (0.724) (0.512) (0.447) (0.155)

Ratio of old to young workers in

1990
2.019 0.383 0.928 0.317 -0.587 2.131∗∗ 1.072 0.826 0.794∗∗∗

(1.542) (0.957) (1.568) (0.867) (0.606) (1.047) (0.653) (0.502) (0.251)

Log of the GDP per capita in

1990
0.633∗∗∗ 0.146 -0.425∗∗ 0.119 0.106 -0.474∗∗∗ 0.020 -0.049 0.048

(0.196) (0.113) (0.201) (0.116) (0.071) (0.125) (0.069) (0.061) (0.033)

Observations 125 130 131 129 131 131 131 130 143

R-squared 0.55 0.64 0.36 0.50 0.42 0.41 0.38 0.25 0.51

Panel B. IV estimates

Aging from 1990 to 2025 4.656∗∗ 1.726∗ 5.087∗ 1.870 1.940∗∗∗ -1.504 0.151 0.457 0.866∗∗∗

(2.139) (0.968) (2.942) (1.393) (0.621) (1.214) (0.749) (0.493) (0.223)

Ratio of old to young workers in

1990
1.920 0.421 0.657 0.359 -0.615 2.206∗∗ 1.119∗ 0.851∗ 0.769∗∗∗

(1.506) (0.910) (1.595) (0.842) (0.548) (0.990) (0.616) (0.469) (0.225)

Log of the GDP per capita in

1990
0.602∗∗∗ 0.162 -0.491∗∗ 0.134 0.099 -0.456∗∗∗ 0.031 -0.039 0.041

(0.200) (0.112) (0.208) (0.114) (0.075) (0.122) (0.071) (0.058) (0.033)

Observations 125 130 131 129 131 131 131 130 143

Instruments F-stat 16.70 15.79 16.49 16.32 16.49 16.49 16.49 15.79 15.12

Overid p-value 0.76 0.25 0.74 0.47 0.60 0.45 0.86 0.72 0.11

Other covariates included:

Country covariates in 1990 X X X X X X X X X

Notes: The dependent variable is the log of total imports from 1990 to 2016 of the intermediate indicated in each column header, normalized by total imports of

intermediate goods. The aging variable is the (projected) change in the ratio of workers above 56 to workers between 21 and 55 between 1990 and 2025 (from the

UN Population Statistics). Panel A presents OLS estimates. Panel B presents IV estimates where the aging variable is instrumented using the size of five-year

birth cohorts between 1950 and 1985. All columns include region dummies and the 1990 values of log GDP per capita, log of population, average years of schooling

and the ratio of workers above 56 to workers between 21 and 55. All regressions are unweighted and the standard errors are robust against heteroscedasticity.

The coefficients with ∗∗∗ are significant at the 1% level, with ∗∗ are significant at the 5% level, and with ∗ are significant at the 10% level.

65



Table 10: Estimates of the impact of aging on the location of robot integrators in the US.

OLS estimates
IV using predicted aging from

1990 demographics

IV using predicted aging

based on past cohort sizes

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)

Panel A. log of 1+the number of integrators

Aging from 1990 to 2015 -0.745∗∗ -0.453 4.281∗∗∗ 4.017∗∗ 2.213∗ 1.946∗

(0.324) (0.310) (1.039) (1.645) (1.148) (1.062)

Exposure to robots measure 0.186∗∗∗ 0.112∗∗∗ 0.105∗∗∗ 0.067∗∗ 0.138∗∗∗ 0.088∗∗∗

(0.025) (0.030) (0.036) (0.031) (0.030) (0.028)

Observations 722 722 722 722 722 722

R-squared 0.10 0.61 -0.28 0.43 -0.03 0.56

Instruments F-stat 70.40 17.83 4.57 5.35

Overid p-value 0.00 0.60

Panel B. Number of integrators

Aging from 1990 to 2015 -5.364∗∗ -3.327 16.221∗∗∗ 16.990∗ 4.842 8.949

(2.436) (2.393) (4.371) (10.104) (8.034) (6.248)

Exposure to robots measure 1.170∗∗∗ 1.427∗∗ 0.822∗∗ 1.226∗∗ 1.005∗∗ 1.306∗∗

(0.395) (0.692) (0.340) (0.559) (0.446) (0.655)

Observations 722 722 722 722 722 722

R-squared 0.09 0.42 -0.07 0.34 0.05 0.39

Instruments F-stat 70.40 17.83 4.57 5.35

Overid p-value 0.00 0.75

Panel C. Dummy for the presence of integrators

Aging from 1990 to 2015 -0.140 0.043 2.406∗∗∗ 2.501∗∗∗ 1.845∗∗ 1.661∗∗

(0.180) (0.201) (0.711) (0.944) (0.721) (0.704)

Exposure to robots measure 0.107∗∗∗ 0.029 0.066∗∗ 0.005 0.075∗∗∗ 0.013

(0.017) (0.019) (0.028) (0.026) (0.022) (0.021)

Observations 722 722 722 722 722 722

R-squared 0.09 0.47 -0.18 0.32 -0.07 0.40

Instruments F-stat 70.40 17.83 4.57 5.35

Overid p-value 0.00 0.60

Other covariates included:

Regional dummies X X X X X X

Commuting zone covariates X X X

Notes: The dependent variable is the number of robot integrators in each US commuting zone (from Leigh and

Kraft, 2016). The aging variable is the change in the ratio of workers above 56 to workers between 21 and 55

between 1990 and 2015 (from the US CEnsus and American Community Survey). Panel A presents estimates using

the log of 1+the number of integrators as the dependent variable. Panel B presents estimates using the number

of integrators as the dependent variable. Panel C presents estimates using a dummy for whether a commuting

zone has an integrator as the dependent variable. Columns 1-2 present OLS estimates. Columns 3-4 present IV

estimates where the aging variable is instrumented using the projected aging based on the age distribution of a

commuting zone in 1990. Columns 5-6 present IV estimates where the aging variable is instrumented using the

size of five-year birth cohorts in past Censuses. Even columns include census region dummies and the mesure

of exposure to robots from Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017a). Odd columns, in addition, control for commuting-

zone covariates, including log population, share of working-age population, share of population by race, share of

population with highschool and college, and the share of employment in broad industry categories in 1990. All

estimates are unweighted, and in parenthesis we report standard errors that are robust against heteroscedasticity

and correlation in the error terms within states. The coefficients with ∗∗∗ are significant at the 1% level, with ∗∗

are significant at the 5% level, and with ∗ are significant at the 10% level.

66



Table 11: OLS estimates of the impact of aging on robot installations by country-industry

pairs per year.

Dependent variable:

Installation of robots in country-industry pairs per year

Potential for the use of robots

Replaceability index BCG measure

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)

Panel A. Normalizing by average employment in an industry.

Aging from 1990 to 2025 1.558∗∗∗ 1.565∗∗∗ 0.961∗∗∗ 0.686∗∗∗ 0.430∗∗

(0.438) (0.441) (0.330) (0.217) (0.164)

Aging × reliance on middle-aged 0.900∗∗∗ 0.601∗∗∗ 0.598∗∗∗ 0.264∗∗∗ 0.177∗∗ 0.174∗∗

(0.252) (0.171) (0.167) (0.090) (0.077) (0.074)

Aging × opportunities for automation 5.738∗∗∗ 4.150∗∗∗ 4.211∗∗∗ 6.045∗∗∗ 4.256∗∗∗ 4.281∗∗∗

(1.751) (1.083) (1.079) (1.680) (1.090) (1.094)

Observations 10602 10602 10602 10602 10602 10602 10602

Countries in sample 50 50 50 50 50 50 50

R-squared 0.36 0.37 0.46 0.47 0.39 0.47 0.49

Panel B. Normalizing by employment from UNIDO.

Aging from 1990 to 2025 3.934∗∗∗ -20.698∗∗ -14.853∗∗∗ -2.413∗∗∗ -1.592

(1.396) (8.434) (4.997) (0.877) (1.074)

Aging × reliance on middle-aged 3.979∗∗∗ 2.392∗∗∗ 2.584∗∗∗ 1.043∗∗∗ 0.646 0.849∗∗

(1.377) (0.818) (0.831) (0.360) (0.390) (0.413)

Aging × opportunities for automation 36.725∗∗ 29.320∗∗∗ 27.123∗∗∗ 7.970∗∗∗ 4.771∗∗∗ 4.768∗∗∗

(17.072) (10.329) (9.573) (2.827) (1.415) (1.444)

Observations 5974 5974 5974 5974 5974 5974 5974

Countries in sample 46 46 46 46 46 46 46

R-squared 0.33 0.35 0.44 0.47 0.37 0.44 0.47

Panel C. Normalizing by employment from KLEMS.

Aging from 1990 to 2025 0.783∗∗∗ 3.667∗∗∗ 3.148∗∗∗ 0.513∗∗∗ 0.462∗∗∗

(0.183) (1.004) (0.932) (0.135) (0.135)

Aging × reliance on middle-aged 0.365∗∗ 0.419∗∗∗ 0.378∗∗∗ 0.108∗ 0.136∗ 0.106

(0.130) (0.124) (0.125) (0.062) (0.067) (0.070)

Aging × opportunities for automation 8.094∗∗∗ 6.375∗∗∗ 6.780∗∗∗ 4.502∗∗∗ 4.180∗∗∗ 4.223∗∗∗

(2.427) (2.164) (2.164) (1.187) (1.053) (1.041)

Observations 5928 5928 5928 5928 5928 5928 5928

Countries in sample 22 22 22 22 22 22 22

R-squared 0.56 0.56 0.57 0.57 0.56 0.57 0.58

Covariates included:

Country covariates in 1990 X X X X X X X

Initial robot density in 1993 X X X X

Country fixed effects X X

Notes: The dependent variable is installations of industrial robots in each country-industry-year cell with available data between 1993 and

2014 (from IFR). The aging variable is the (projected) change in the ratio of workers above 56 to workers between 21 and 55 between 1990

and 2025 (from the UN Population Statistics). We also estimate the interaction of aging with an industry reliance on young workers (proxied

using 1990 US Census data on the age distribution of workers in each industry), and the two measures for opportunities for automation:

the replaceability index from Graetz and Michaels (2015) in columns 2-4; and a measure of potential for the use of robots from the BCG in

columns 5-7. Panel A presents estimates where we normalize robot installations by the average employment in an industry from the ILO.

Panel B presents estimates where we normalize robot installations by employment in an industry from UNIDO. Panel C presents estimates

where we normalize robot installations by employment in an industry from EUKLEMS. All columns include region dummies, and the 1990

values of log GDP per capita, log of population, average years of schooling and the ratio of workers above 56 to workers between 21 and 55.

Columns 3 and 6 add the baseline (1993) value of robots per thousand workers. Columns 4 and 7 include a full set of country fixed effects.

All regressions weigh industries by their share of employment in a country, and the standard errors are robust against heteroscedasticity and

correlation within countries. The coefficients with ∗∗∗ are significant at the 1% level, with ∗∗ are significant at the 5% level, and with ∗ are

significant at the 10% level.

67



Table 12: IV estimates of the impact of aging on robot installations by country-industry pairs

per year.

Dependent variable:

Installation of robots in country-industry pairs per year

Potential for the use of robots

Replaceability index BCG measure

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)

Panel A. Normalizing by average employment in an industry.

Aging from 1990 to 2025 1.424∗∗∗ -2.832∗∗∗ -1.800∗∗∗ -0.846∗∗ -0.465∗

(0.476) (0.938) (0.593) (0.356) (0.282)

Aging × reliance on middle-aged 0.950∗∗∗ 0.548∗∗∗ 0.546∗∗∗ 0.327∗∗∗ 0.186∗∗ 0.181∗∗

(0.311) (0.189) (0.185) (0.112) (0.086) (0.083)

Aging × opportunities for automation 5.325∗∗∗ 4.058∗∗∗ 4.037∗∗∗ 5.883∗∗∗ 3.750∗∗∗ 3.785∗∗∗

(1.932) (1.190) (1.188) (1.981) (1.212) (1.221)

Observations 10602 10602 10602 10602 10602 10602 10602

Countries in sample 50 50 50 50 50 50 50

Instruments F-stat 19.01 . 6.01 7.82 . 6.37 7.99

Overid p-value 0.86 0.21 0.39 0.72 0.17 0.60 0.47

Panel B. Normalizing by employment from UNIDO.

Aging from 1990 to 2025 4.476∗∗∗ -24.684∗∗∗ -16.560∗∗∗ -3.205∗∗∗ -1.416

(1.439) (8.935) (5.209) (1.016) (0.978)

Aging × reliance on middle-aged 4.875∗∗∗ 2.461∗∗∗ 2.776∗∗∗ 1.243∗∗∗ 0.530 0.847∗∗

(1.427) (0.780) (0.848) (0.384) (0.348) (0.409)

Aging × opportunities for automation 41.672∗∗ 33.939∗∗∗ 30.569∗∗∗ 9.751∗∗∗ 5.380∗∗∗ 5.402∗∗∗

(18.597) (11.523) (10.885) (3.126) (1.591) (1.618)

Observations 5974 5974 5974 5974 5974 5974 5974

Countries in sample 46 46 46 46 46 46 46

Instruments F-stat 15.04 9.58 10.06 7.62 9.50 9.46 7.33

Overid p-value 0.67 0.25 0.34 0.47 0.26 0.40 0.27

Panel C. Normalizing by employment from KLEMS.

Aging from 1990 to 2025 0.837∗∗∗ 0.381∗∗ 0.338∗∗∗ 0.266∗∗ 0.225∗∗∗

(0.196) (0.149) (0.110) (0.114) (0.085)

Aging × reliance on middle-aged 0.424∗∗∗ 0.404∗∗∗ 0.367∗∗∗ 0.167∗∗ 0.122 0.096

(0.136) (0.143) (0.139) (0.068) (0.078) (0.079)

Aging × opportunities for automation 8.139∗∗∗ 6.910∗∗∗ 7.283∗∗∗ 4.832∗∗∗ 4.595∗∗∗ 4.646∗∗∗

(2.762) (2.224) (2.232) (1.398) (1.168) (1.155)

Observations 5928 5928 5928 5928 5928 5928 5928

Countries in sample 22 22 22 22 22 22 22

Instruments F-stat 21.33 28.15 96.13 15.35 31.36 32.88 9.07

Overid p-value 0.06 0.26 0.35 0.16 0.32 0.40 0.16

Covariates included:

Country covariates in 1990 X X X X X X X

Initial robot density in 1993 X X X X

Country fixed effects X X

Notes: The dependent variable is installations of industrial robots in each country-industry-year cell with available data between 1993 and

2014 (from IFR). The aging variable is the (projected) change in the ratio of workers above 56 to workers between 21 and 55 between 1990

and 2025 (from the UN Population Statistics). We also estimate the interaction of aging with an industry reliance on young workers (proxied

using 1990 US Census data on the age distribution of workers in each industry), and the two measures for opportunities for automation:

the replaceability index from Graetz and Michaels (2015) in columns 2-4; and a measure of potential for the use of robots from the BCG in

columns 5-7. Panel A presents estimates where we normalize robot installations by the average employment in an industry from the ILO.

Panel B presents estimates where we normalize robot installations by employment in an industry from UNIDO. Panel C presents estimates

where we normalize robot installations by employment in an industry from EUKLEMS. We instrument aging and its interactions using the

size of five-year birth cohorts between 1950 and 1985. All columns include region dummies, and the 1990 values of log GDP per capita, log

of population, average years of schooling and the ratio of workers above 56 to workers between 21 and 55. Columns 3 and 6 add the baseline

(1993) value of robots per thousand workers. Columns 4 and 7 include a full set of country fixed effects. All regressions weigh industries by

their share of employment in a country, and the standard errors are robust against heteroscedasticity and correlation within countries. The

coefficients with ∗∗∗ are significant at the 1% level, with ∗∗ are significant at the 5% level, and with ∗ are significant at the 10% level.

68



Table 13: OLS estimates of the impact of aging and past aging on robot installations by

country-industry pairs per year.

Dependent variable:

Installation of robots in country-industry pairs per year

Potential for the use of robots

Replaceability index BCG measure

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)

Panel A. Placebo test

Aging from 1950 to 1990 -0.038 0.407 1.326 0.894 2.402

(0.746) (1.797) (1.121) (2.958) (1.958)

Past Aging × Reliance on Middle-Aged Workers 0.325 0.255 0.265 0.125 0.022 0.028

(0.448) (0.268) (0.268) (0.172) (0.117) (0.111)

Past Aging × Opportunities for Automation -0.334 2.740 2.398 1.604 2.307 2.291

(3.220) (2.040) (2.056) (2.828) (1.787) (1.818)

Observations 10602 10602 10602 10602 10602 10602 10602

Countries in sample 50 50 50 50 50 50 50

R-squared 0.35 0.35 0.45 0.47 0.36 0.46 0.47

Panel B. Past vs. expected aging

Aging from 1950 to 1990 -0.562 -0.862 0.435 -0.866 0.753

(0.739) (1.713) (1.106) (2.917) (1.955)

Past Aging × Reliance on Middle-Aged Workers 0.021 0.056 0.064 0.036 -0.029 -0.024

(0.400) (0.256) (0.255) (0.155) (0.113) (0.108)

Past Aging × Opportunities for Automation -2.329 1.190 0.939 -0.455 0.812 0.796

(3.105) (1.998) (2.054) (2.576) (1.781) (1.808)

Aging from 1990 to 2025 1.595∗∗∗ 3.796∗∗∗ 2.504∗∗∗ 6.787∗∗∗ 4.633∗∗∗

(0.420) (0.988) (0.631) (1.774) (1.202)

Aging × Reliance on Middle-Aged Workers 0.899∗∗∗ 0.597∗∗∗ 0.594∗∗∗ 0.262∗∗∗ 0.179∗∗ 0.175∗∗

(0.240) (0.167) (0.163) (0.085) (0.076) (0.073)

Aging × Opportunities for Automation 5.884∗∗∗ 4.071∗∗∗ 4.150∗∗∗ 6.074∗∗∗ 4.200∗∗∗ 4.228∗∗∗

(1.682) (1.053) (1.048) (1.616) (1.066) (1.071)

Observations 10602 10602 10602 10602 10602 10602 10602

Countries in sample 50 50 50 50 50 50 50

R-squared 0.36 0.37 0.46 0.47 0.39 0.47 0.49

Covariates included:

Country covariates in 1990 X X X X X X X

Initial robot density in 1993 X X X X

Country fixed effects X X

Notes: The dependent variable is installations of industrial robots in each country-industry-year cell with available data between 1993 and 2014

(from IFR). We normalize installations using the average employment by industry from the ILO. In Panel A, the aging variable is the past

change in the ratio of workers above 56 to workers between 21 and 55 between 1950 and 1990 (from the UN Population Statistics). In Panel

B, we also include (projected) aging between 1990 and 2025 (from the UN Population Statistics). We also estimate the interaction of past and

(projected) aging with an industry reliance on young workers (proxied using 1990 US Census data on the age distribution of workers in each

industry), and the two measures for opportunities for automation: the replaceability index from Graetz and Michaels (2015) in columns 2-4;

and a measure of potential for the use of robots from the BCG in columns 5-7. All columns include region dummies, and the 1990 values of

log GDP per capita, log of population, average years of schooling and the ratio of workers above 56 to workers between 21 and 55. Columns 3

and 6 add the baseline (1993) value of robots per thousand workers. Columns 4 and 7 include a full set of country fixed effects. All regressions

weigh industries by their share of employment in a country, and the standard errors are robust against heteroscedasticity and correlation

within countries. The coefficients with ∗∗∗ are significant at the 1% level, with ∗∗ are significant at the 5% level, and with ∗ are significant

at the 10% level.

69



Table 14: Estimates of the impact of aging on the value added of country-industry pairs per

year.

Dependent variable:

Change in value-added per worker from 1995 to 2007

Potential for the use of robots

Replaceability index BCG measure

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)

Panel A. OLS estimates

Aging from 1995 to 2025 -1.455∗∗ 0.124 0.317 0.306 0.523

(0.559) (1.259) (1.159) (1.216) (1.138)

Aging × reliance on middle-aged -0.253 -0.296 -0.253 -0.248 -0.291 -0.255

(0.256) (0.242) (0.238) (0.251) (0.239) (0.244)

Aging × opportunities for automation 2.900∗∗ 3.069∗∗ 3.019∗∗∗ 1.141∗∗ 1.220∗∗ 1.219∗∗

(1.238) (1.192) (0.936) (0.501) (0.483) (0.469)

Observations 418 418 418 418 418 418 418

Countries in sample 22 22 22 22 22 22 22

R-squared 0.77 0.77 0.78 0.91 0.77 0.78 0.91

Panel B. IV estimates

Aging from 1995 to 2025 -1.728∗∗∗ 1.290 1.334 1.232 1.348

(0.622) (1.270) (1.162) (1.422) (1.319)

Aging × reliance on middle-aged -0.597∗∗ -0.624∗∗ -0.597∗ -0.558∗ -0.592∗∗ -0.593∗

(0.295) (0.279) (0.326) (0.305) (0.290) (0.354)

Aging × opportunities for automation 4.498∗∗∗ 4.510∗∗∗ 4.149∗∗∗ 1.512∗∗∗ 1.570∗∗∗ 1.559∗∗∗

(1.313) (1.476) (1.007) (0.427) (0.442) (0.398)

Observations 418 418 418 418 418 418 418

Countries in sample 22 22 22 22 22 22 22

Instruments F-stat 8.20 27.62 16.20 6.16 51.22 12.66 5.38

Overid p-value 0.18 0.58 0.71 0.55 0.41 0.45 0.35

Panel C. IV estimates (STAN data)

Aging from 1995 to 2025 -2.030∗∗∗ 0.530 0.878 0.528 0.732

(0.471) (0.999) (0.838) (1.059) (0.920)

Aging × Reliance on Middle-Aged Workers -0.477∗∗ -0.424∗ -0.373∗ -0.434∗ -0.379 -0.336

(0.231) (0.233) (0.224) (0.231) (0.238) (0.232)

Aging × Opportunities for Automation 3.894∗∗∗ 3.861∗∗∗ 3.080∗∗∗ 1.407∗∗∗ 1.255∗∗∗ 1.049∗∗∗

(1.425) (1.180) (0.766) (0.509) (0.423) (0.407)

Observations 462 462 462 462 462 462 462

Countries in sample 27 27 27 27 27 27 27

Instruments F-stat 18.97 23.42 11.29 10.69 14.72 10.06 12.64

Overid p-value 0.98 0.55 0.47 0.33 0.45 0.32 0.28

Covariates included:

Country covariates in 1990 X X X X X X X

Initial value added in 1995 X X X X

Country fixed effects X X

Notes: The dependent variable is the change in value-added per worker from in each country-industry pair between 1995 and 2007 (from

EUKLEMS in Panels A and B, and STAN in Panel C). The aging variable is the (projected) change in the ratio of workers above 56 to workers

between 21 and 55 between 1990 and 2025 (from the UN Population Statistics). We also estimate the interaction of aging with an industry

reliance on young workers (proxied using 1990 US Census data on the age distribution of workers in each industry), and the two measures for

opportunities for automation: the replaceability index from Graetz and Michaels (2015) in columns 2-4; and a measure of potential for the

use of robots from the BCG in columns 5-7. Panel A presents OLS, and Panel B presents IV estimates where we instrument aging and its

interactions using the size of five-year birth cohorts between 1950 and 1985. Panel C presents additional estimates using data from STAN. All

columns include region dummies, and the 1990 values of log GDP per capita, log of population, average years of schooling and the ratio of

workers above 56 to workers between 21 and 55. Columns 3 and 6 add the baseline (1993) value of robots per thousand workers. Columns 4

and 7 include a full set of country fixed effects. All regressions weigh industries by their share of employment in a country, and the standard

errors are robust against heteroscedasticity and correlation within countries. The coefficients with ∗∗∗ are significant at the 1% level, with ∗∗

are significant at the 5% level, and with ∗ are significant at the 10% level.

70



Appendix Figures and Tables

-1
.5

-1
-.
5

0
.5

P
oi

n
t 

es
ti
m

at
e

 16-20 21-25 26-30 31-35 36-40 41-45 46-50 51-55 56-60 61-65  

Baseline estimates Removing highly exposed areas Pooled model

Employment rates
-3

-2
-1

0
1

2
P
oi

n
t 

es
ti
m

at
e

 16-20 21-25 26-30 31-35 36-40 41-45 46-50 51-55 56-60 61-65  

Baseline estimates Removing highly exposed areas Pooled model

Log of wages

Figure A1: Estimated impact of one additional robot per thousand workers on employment

and wages. The figure plots the estimates for different age groups and for men separately.

A-1



Table A1: Set of countries in our sample and availability of industry data.

OECD sample Other countries

Country name Industry data since Country name Industry data since

Australia 2006 Argentina 2004

Austria 2003 Brazil 2004

Belgium 2004 Bulgaria 2006

Chile 2006 China 2006

Czech Republic 2004 Colombia 2007

Denmark 1996 Egypt 2005

Estonia 2004 Hong Kong 2006

Finland 1993 India 2006

France 1993 Indonesia 2006

Germany 1993 Malaysia 2006

Greece 2006 Moldova 2010

Hungary 2004 Morocco 2005

Iceland 2006 Peru 2006

Ireland 2006 Philippines 2006

Israel 2005 Romania 2004

Italy 1993 Singapore 2005

Netherlands 2004 Thailand 2005

New Zealand 2006 Ukraine 2004

Norway 1993 Venezuela 2007

Poland 2004 Vietnam 2005

Portugal 2004

Rep. of Korea 2001 Countries with no industry data

Slovakia 2004 Pakistan .

Slovenia 2005 Macau .

Spain 1993

Sweden 1993

Switzerland 2004

Turkey 2005

United Kingdom 1993

United States 2004

Notes: The table presents a list of the countries in our sample as well as the years for which industry-level data

are available from the IFR.

A-2



Table A2: Estimates of the impact of aging from 1990 to 2015 on the adoption of industrial

robots.

Dependent variable:

Change in the stock of industrial robots per thousand workers (annualized)

Full sample OECD sample

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)

Panel A. OLS estimates

Aging from 1990 to 2015 1.229∗∗∗ 0.975∗∗∗ 0.657∗∗ 1.463∗∗ 1.295∗∗ 0.763∗

(0.408) (0.338) (0.300) (0.616) (0.478) (0.368)

Ratio of old to young workers in 1990 -0.074 -0.341 -0.342 -0.913

(0.285) (0.238) (0.546) (0.582)

Log of the GDP per capita in 1990 0.059 -0.004 0.076 -0.004

(0.035) (0.030) (0.057) (0.053)

Robots per thousand workers in 1993 0.050∗∗ 0.073∗∗∗

(0.023) (0.023)

Observations 52 52 52 30 30 30

R-squared 0.42 0.55 0.70 0.24 0.44 0.61

Panel B. IV estimates

Aging from 1990 to 2015 1.381∗∗∗ 1.110∗∗∗ 0.814∗∗∗ 2.574∗∗∗ 1.305∗∗∗ 0.708∗∗

(0.390) (0.317) (0.263) (0.941) (0.450) (0.350)

Ratio of old to young workers in 1990 -0.073 -0.330 -0.342 -0.924∗

(0.262) (0.222) (0.487) (0.519)

Log of the GDP per capita in 1990 0.053 -0.008 0.076 -0.005

(0.034) (0.027) (0.050) (0.045)

Robots per thousand workers in 1993 0.048∗∗ 0.074∗∗∗

(0.020) (0.020)

Observations 52 52 52 30 30 30

Instruments F-stat 14.98 11.59 10.15 3.20 3.90 6.77

Overid p-value 0.77 0.47 0.10 0.68 0.45 0.08

Covariates included:

Country covariates in 1990 X X X X

Initial robot density in 1993 X X

Notes: The dependent variable is change in the stock of industrial robots per thousand workers from 1993 to 2014

(from IFR). The aging variable is the observed change in the ratio of workers above 56 to workers between 21

and 55 between 1990 and 2015 (from the UN Population Statistics). Panel A presents OLS estimates. Panel B

presents IV estimates where the aging variable is instrumented using the size of five-year birth cohorts between

1950 and 1985. Columns 1-3 use the full sample, while columns 4-6 are for the OECD sample. Columns 1 and

4 include region dummies. Columns 2 and 5, in addition, include the 1990 values of log GDP per capita, log of

population, average years of schooling and the ratio of workers above 56 to workers between 21 and 55. Columns

3 and 6 add the baseline (1993) value of robots per thousand workers. All regressions are unweighted and the

standard errors are robust against heteroscedasticity. The coefficients with ∗∗∗ are significant at the 1% level,

with ∗∗ are significant at the 5% level, and with ∗ are significant at the 10% level.

A-3



Table A3: Estimates of the impact of aging on the adoption of industrial robots using different

definitions of middle-aged and senior workers.

Dependent variable:

Change in the stock of industrial robots

per thousand workers (annualized)

OLS estimates IV estimates

All countries OECD All countries OECD

(1) (2) (3) (4)

Panel A. Middle-aged from 21-60; Senior from 61 onwards

Aging from 1990 to 2025 0.594∗∗ 0.731∗∗ 0.738∗∗∗ 0.827∗∗∗

(0.268) (0.302) (0.236) (0.286)

Observations 52 30 52 30

Instruments F-stat 16.03 13.29

Overid p-value 0.14 0.05

Panel B. Middle-aged from 21-50; Senior from 51 onwards

Aging from 1990 to 2025 0.326∗∗ 0.614∗∗ 0.376∗∗∗ 0.834∗∗∗

(0.144) (0.223) (0.132) (0.248)

Observations 52 30 52 30

Instruments F-stat 12.29 9.92

Overid p-value 0.13 0.03

Panel C. Middle-aged from 21-55; Senior from 56-70

Aging from 1990 to 2025 0.828∗∗ 1.429∗∗∗ 0.815∗∗ 1.674∗∗∗

(0.367) (0.488) (0.347) (0.610)

Observations 52 30 52 30

Instruments F-stat 18.55 19.12

Overid p-value 0.06 0.03

Panel D. Middle-aged from 36-55; Senior from 56 onwards

Aging from 1990 to 2025 0.313∗∗ 0.391∗∗ 0.319∗∗∗ 0.347∗∗

(0.130) (0.155) (0.121) (0.162)

Observations 52 30 52 30

Instruments F-stat 13.47 5.69

Overid p-value 0.15 0.08

Covariates included:

Country covariates in 1990 X X X X

Initial robot density in 1993 X X X X

Notes: The dependent variable is change in the stock of industrial robots per thousand workers from 1993 to 2014 (from

IFR). The aging variable is the (projected) change in the ratio of senior to middle-aged workers between 1990 and 2025

(from the UN Population Statistics). In panel A we define middle-aged workers as those between 21 and 60, and senior

workers as those above 61. In panel A we define middle-aged workers as those between 21 and 50, and senior workers as

those above 51. In panel C we define middle-aged workers as those between 21 and 55, and senior workers as those between

56 and 70. In panel D we define middle-aged workers as those between 36 and 55, and senior workers as those above 56.

Columns 1-2 present OLS estimates, while columns 3-4 present IV estimates where the aging variable is instrumented using

the size of five-year birth cohorts between 1950 and 1985. Columns 1 and 3 use the full sample, while columns 2 and 4

are for the OECD sample. All columns include region dummies, the 1990 values of log GDP per capita, log of population,

average years of schooling and the ratio of workers above 56 to workers between 21 and 55, and the baseline (1993) value of

robots per thousand workers. All regressions are unweighted and the standard errors are robust against heteroscedasticity.

The coefficients with ∗∗∗ are significant at the 1% level, with ∗∗ are significant at the 5% level, and with ∗ are significant

at the 10% level.

A-4



Table A4: Estimates of the impact of aging on robot installations per year and additional

specifications.

Full sample OECD sample

Dependent variable:

∆ ln(1 +R) ∆ lnR Poisson ∆ ln(1 +R) ∆ lnR Poisson

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)

Panel A. OLS estimates

main

Aging from 1990 to 2025 4.609∗∗ 2.830∗∗∗ 1.364∗∗∗ 1.140 2.099∗ 0.821∗∗

(1.843) (0.860) (0.481) (1.396) (1.058) (0.396)

Observations 52 23 1144 30 22 660

Countries in sample 52 30

R-squared 0.85 0.79 0.89 0.71

Panel B. IV estimates

main

Aging from 1990 to 2025 5.570∗∗ 3.493∗∗∗ 1.364∗∗∗ -1.211 2.527∗∗ 0.821∗∗

(2.172) (1.032) (0.481) (2.730) (1.172) (0.396)

Observations 52 23 1144 30 22 660

Countries in sample 52 30

R-squared 0.85 0.79 0.88 0.71

Instruments F-stat 16.80 3.28 6.19 5.36

Overid p-value 0.02 0.26 0.11 0.08

Country covariates in 1990 X X X X X X

Initial robot density in 1993 X X X X X X

Notes: The dependent variable is: in Panel A, the change in log of 1+ the number of robots in a country from

1993 to 2014 (from IFR); in Panel B, the change in the log of the number of robots in a country from 1993 to 2014

(from IFR); and in Panel C, the the number of robot installations in each country-year pair from 1993 to 2014

(from IFR)—and in this case we estimate a Poisson model. The aging variable is the observed change in the ratio

of workers above 56 to workers between 21 and 55 between 1990 and 2015 (from the UN Population Statistics).

Panel A presents OLS estimates. Panel B presents IV estimates where the aging variable is instrumented using

the size of five-year birth cohorts between 1950 and 1985. Columns 1-3 use the full sample, while columns 4-6

are for the OECD sample. All columns include region dummies, the 1990 values of log GDP per capita, log of

population, average years of schooling and the ratio of workers above 56 to workers between 21 and 55, and the

baseline (1993) value of robots per thousand workers. All regressions are unweighted and the standard errors are

robust against heteroscedasticity. The coefficients with ∗∗∗ are significant at the 1% level, with ∗∗ are significant

at the 5% level, and with ∗ are significant at the 10% level.

A-5



Table A5: Estimates of the impact of aging on economic activity at the country level.

OLS estimates IV estimates

EUKLEMS sample OECD EUKLEMS sample OECD

Value

added
GDP GDP

Value

added
GDP GDP

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)

Aging from 1995 to 2025 -1.307∗∗ -0.306 -0.110 -1.694∗∗∗ -0.705 -0.378

(0.529) (0.353) (0.214) (0.615) (0.442) (0.374)

Observations 22 22 35 22 22 35

R-squared 0.86 0.78 0.70 0.86 0.76 0.69

Instruments F-stat 4.89 3.69 6.83

Overid p-value 0.22 0.38 0.24

Country covariates in 1990 X X X X X X

Notes: The dependent variable is: in columns 1 and 4, the change in value added per worker from 1995 to 2007

(from EUKLEMS); in columns 2-3 and 5-6, the change in the log of GDP per capita from 1995 to 2007 (from the

Penn World Tables). The aging variable is the observed change in the ratio of workers above 56 to workers between

21 and 55 between 1990 and 2015 (from the UN Population Statistics). Columns 1-3 presents OLS estimates.

Columns 4-6 present IV estimates where the aging variable is instrumented using the size of five-year birth cohorts

between 1950 and 1985. All columns include the 1990 values of log GDP per capita, log of population, average

years of schooling and the ratio of workers above 56 to workers between 21 and 55. All regressions are unweighted

and the standard errors are robust against heteroscedasticity. The coefficients with ∗∗∗ are significant at the 1%

level, with ∗∗ are significant at the 5% level, and with ∗ are significant at the 10% level.

A-6


	Introduction
	Directed Technology Adoption
	The Environment
	Equilibrium with exogenous technology
	Equilibrium with endogenous technology
	Implications for productivity

	Data
	Cross-country and commuting-zone data
	Industry-level data

	The Substitution between Robots and Workers
	Demographic Change and The Adoption of Robots
	Main Results
	Placebo Exercises, Robustness and Additional Results
	Alternative Measures of Investment in Robots and Automation

	Demographics and Robots across US Commuting Zones
	Demographics and Robots: Industry-Level Results
	Productivity
	Conclusion

