




















































Technology-Driven Unemployment


Technology-Driven Unemployment

Gregory Casey*

October 2017

(Newest Version)

Abstract

To examine the relationship between technological progress and unemployment, I study
a model that features putty-clay production, directed technical change, and labor mar-
ket bargaining. I have two primary goals. First, I aim to understand the forces that
deliver a constant steady state unemployment rate in the presence of labor-saving tech-
nical change. The interaction between directed technical change and wage bargaining
plays a crucial role in this process. Labor-saving technical change increases unemploy-
ment, which lowers wages and creates incentives for future investment in labor-using
technologies. In the long run, this interaction generates a balanced growth path that
is observationally equivalent to that of the standard neoclassical growth model, except
that is also incorporates a steady state level of unemployment. Second, I investigate
the effect of ‘technological breakthroughs’ that permanently lower the cost of creat-
ing new labor-saving technologies. Breakthroughs lead to faster growth in output per
worker and wages but also yield higher long-run unemployment and a lower labor share
of income. Surprisingly, they also lower output in the short-run, because additional
investment in labor-saving technologies is inefficient when workers are not scarce, as
in the presence of technology-driven unemployment.

Keywords Labor-Saving Technical Change, Unemployment, Directed Technical
Change, Growth

JEL Codes E24, O33, O40

*I am grateful to Joaquin Blaum, Pascal Michaillat, Stelios Michalopoulos, Juan Moreno-Cruz, Oded Galor,
David Weil, and seminar participants at Brown University for helpful comments. All opinions and any errors are my
own. Contact Information: Gregory Casey@Brown.edu, Department of Economics, Brown University, 64 Waterman
St., Providence, RI 02912.

https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B5UYeAzDH76ybVZod2d0SUR1dG8


1 Introduction

From the Luddites to Keynes (1930) to Silicon Valley, there has long been fear that labor-saving

technical change would lead to increased unemployment and even the obsolescence of labor in

production. While the most extreme versions of these predictions have not come to fruition, it

is certainly the case that new technologies have eliminated jobs in particular industries at par-

ticular times. The lack of ever-increasing unemployment suggests that past job losses caused by

labor-saving technologies have been offset by other economic forces. Nonetheless, there remains

great concern that a coming technological revolution will fundamentally alter the labor market in

developed countries (Akst, 2013; Autor, 2014, 2015).

The neoclassical growth model assumes that an unlimited number of workers can each produc-

tively use any fixed quantity of specific capital goods. While convenient for many applications,

this unrealistic assumption precludes any relationship between labor-saving technical change and

the saturation of labor demand. To study technology-driven unemployment, therefore, I focus on

the case of putty-clay production, which growth theorists have long considered more realistic (e.g.,

Johansen, 1959; Samuelson, 1962; Cass and Stiglitz, 1969). Embodied technological characteristics

determine the input requirements of creating and operating each capital good. Substitution be-

tween inputs occurs via the choice of technology (Solow, 1962; Calvo, 1976; Jones, 2005). For a

given set of technologies and quantity of installed capital, the economy can only support a finite

number of workers with positive marginal product. As a result, insufficient labor demand can

generate unemployment (Johansen, 1959; Solow et al., 1966; Akerlof and Stiglitz, 1969).1,2

I build on the existing literature on putty-clay production by incorporating two new elements,

directed technical change and labor-market frictions. The standard labor-augmenting technology

lowers labor input requirements and, holding all else constant, reduces employment. This type

of technology is labor-saving. A second type of technology lowers the cost of producing new

capital goods. This type of technology is capital-augmenting, labor-using, and capital-saving. The

two types of technology are embodied in capital goods and evolve over time according to profit

maximizing research and development activity (Acemoglu, 1998, 2002). Frictions in the labor

market ensure that the wage lies between the marginal product of workers and their opportunity

cost of working (Pissarides, 2000; Rogerson et al., 2005).

I have two primary goals. First, I aim to understand the forces that deliver constant unem-

ployment in the presence of labor-saving technical change. Second, I investigate how fundamental

1In his seminal contribution that demonstrated how to ‘synthesize’ the fixed-factor and aggregate approaches,
Johansen (1959) addressed the importance of considering technological change in this context: “[i]n conclusion it
is suggested that the proposed hypothesis would be particularly appropriate in studying the introduction of new
techniques and the relationship between population growth, the rate of saving and ‘structural’ unemployment.” This
is an apt description of the current paper, which examines how the evolution of cutting-edge technologies interacts
with labor force growth and capital accumulation to determine long-run, technology-driven unemployment.

2Solow et al. (1966) note the possibility of this outcome, but do not provide any formal analysis, arguing that
it would not be a sustainable outcome in a market economy. In this sense, a key contribution of the current paper
is to show how adding labor-market frictions and directed technical change creates the possibility for this type of
technology-driven unemployment to exist in equilibrium.

1



changes to the structure of the economy, such as a ‘third industrial revolution’ or ‘second machine

age,’ will affect labor market outcomes (Brynjolfsson and McAfee, 2012, 2014). I first perform a

theoretical analysis that highlights the forces of balanced growth, as well as the consequences of

changes in fundamental parameters. I then calibrate the model to aggregate macroeconomic data

from the U.S. and perform computational experiments to better understand the transition dynam-

ics. Throughout the analysis, I pay special attention to trade-offs between equity and efficiency

and between short- and long-run outcomes.

In the model, a balanced growth path with a constant unemployment rate emerges from the

interaction between directed technical change and labor market bargaining. Given a set of tech-

nologies and amount of installed capital, the economy can only support a finite number of workers.

When labor becomes more efficient, fewer workers can be profitably employed in the short-run,

holding all else constant. This tendency towards increased unemployment is offset by economic

expansion. In particular, the accumulation of capital goods – via increased investment or techno-

logical progress that lowers the cost of capital goods – increases the number of jobs in the economy.

The long-run unemployment rate depends on the relative growth rates of the labor-saving and

labor-using forces. Improvements in labor-saving technologies lead to higher unemployment, which

lowers wages and, consequently, increases future investment in labor-using technologies. Thus, a

balanced growth path exists with investment in both types of technology, as well as capital accu-

mulation and population growth. Indeed, the balanced growth path of the putty-clay model with

directed technical change is observationally equivalent to that of the standard neoclassical growth

model,3 except that is also incorporates a steady state level of unemployment, endogenous research

allocations, and capital-augmenting technical change.4

I then consider the impact of a ‘technological breakthrough’ that permanently lowers the cost of

developing new labor-saving technologies. After the breakthrough, labor-saving technology grows at

a faster rate and unemployment increases. The increase in unemployment lowers wages. Although

cheaper, the development of new technologies is still costly. As a result, the fall in wages leads

capital good producers to invest in labor-using technologies. The economy eventually converges to a

new long-run equilibrium with a higher steady state rate of unemployment. Thus, even fundamental

changes to the structure of the economy do not lead to ever-increasing unemployment and ‘the end

of work’ as predicted by many economists and public intellectuals.5

3The standard neoclassical growth model was a response to the earlier models of Harrod (1948) and Domar
(1946), which used production functions with fixed inputs coefficients to achieve balanced growth (Solow, 1994).
These models required a knife-edge condition to yield constant unemployment, a shortcoming emphasized by Solow
(1956, 1994). In this paper, the knife-edge case generating constant unemployment is an endogenous outcome.

4The Uzawa steady state theorem implies that, with a standard neoclassical production function, all technological
progress must labor-augmenting on a balanced growth path (Uzawa, 1961; Schlicht, 2006; Jones and Scrimgeour,
2008). With only one type of technology, it is not possible to have both labor-saving an labor-using technology in
the long-run. Following Casey and Horii (2017), the new model generates balanced growth with capital-augmenting
technical change by incorporating land into the production function. In this way, the current paper is related to the
broader literature examining the Uzawa theorem (e.g., Acemoglu, 2003; Jones, 2005; Grossman et al., 2017).

5See, for example, references in Akst (2013), Brynjolfsson and McAfee (2014), and Autor (2014, 2015).

2



Even though improvements in technology do not lead to the irrelevance of work, faster techno-

logical progress is not unambiguously positive for workers. When labor efficiency improves, fewer

workers are needed to a given amount of output. This has two countervailing effects. Productiv-

ity is higher, which pushes up wages. At the same time, unemployment increases, which lowers

worker bargaining power. In the long-run, breakthroughs increase both the growth rate of wages

and unemployment, helping some workers but hurting others. Also, the growth rate of output per

capita increases, but the labor share decreases. Thus, there are equity-efficiency trade-offs between

different groups of workers and between different factors of production.

Perhaps more surprisingly, technological breakthroughs lower output in the short-run. In the

presence of technology-driven unemployment, investment in labor-saving technology is wasteful,

because it saves a resources that is not scarce. Total output could be increased by substituting

unemployed workers for investment in labor-saving technology and employing the unused R&D

inputs in the development of new capital-saving technologies. Technological breakthroughs exac-

erbate this inefficiency by causing a reallocation of R&D inputs towards labor-saving technologies.

This increases the long-run growth rate of the economy, but decreases output in the short-run.6

The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 discusses how the current study fits into the existing

literature. Section 3 presents the model, while Section 4 presents the calibration and outcome of

the quantitative exercises. Section 5 concludes.

2 Relation to Existing Literature

Recently, there has been considerable interest in the study of labor-saving technical change (e.g.,

Graetz and Michaels, 2017; Acemoglu and Restrepo, 2017a,b). This paper complements the exist-

ing theoretical literature by focusing the relationship between labor-saving technical change and

involuntary unemployment (Benzell et al., 2015; Acemoglu and Restrepo, 2016; Hémous and Olsen,

2016). As explained above, unemployment persists in the model because of putty-clay production.

Standard neoclassical production functions allow ex post substitution between capital and labor.

While this is convenient for many applications, it hampers the study of unemployment by assuming

that an unlimited number of workers can each productively use a finite set of capital goods.

This paper also complements the existing theoretical literature by examining the role of factor-

augmenting technologies. In standard neoclassical settings, it is rarely the case that factor-augmenting

technologies are labor-saving (Acemoglu, 2010; Acemoglu and Autor, 2011). As a result, the ex-

isting literature has focused on other types of technological progress. For example, Peretto and

Seater (2013) consider a growth model where innovation changes the exponents in a Cobb-Douglas

6While the main goal of this paper is to examine the relationship between technology and unemployment, I also
consider the impact of changes in worker bargaining power and labor force growth. Changes in bargaining power
introduce a set of equity-efficiency trade-offs that differ from those associated with technological breakthroughs. In
particular, reductions in worker bargaining power increase output and employment, but lower the labor share of
income. Changes in bargaining power have no long-run effect on technological progress. Slower labor force growth
creates scarcity, leading to faster wage growth, a lower unemployment rate, and a higher labor share of income.

3



production function.7 Relatedly, Acemoglu and Restrepo (2016) and Hémous and Olsen (2016)

build on the tasked-based framework of Acemoglu and Autor (2011) and Zeira (1998). By consid-

ering the role of putty-clay production with labor market bargaining, the current model shows how

labor-augmenting technology can cause unemployment – lowering the wages of some workers to

zero – and even lower wages for employed workers. In this way, the model demonstrates that labor-

augmenting technology can have a complicated and time-varying effect on wages and on worker

welfare more generally.

Of these existing papers, the current study is most closely related to the work of Acemoglu and

Restrepo (2016), who also focus on a model with a homogeneous set of workers.8 As noted above, I

build on their work by incorporating involuntary unemployment and by studying a different form of

technological change. Despite the significant differences between the two models, they yield some

overlapping insights, reinforcing the findings of both models.

This paper is also related to the broader literature on directed technical change (e.g., Acemoglu,

1998, 2002). In particular, the model shows how directed technical change is important in generating

a steady state level of unemployment. With exogenous technical change, constant unemployment

would only exists in a knife-edge case. The model developed in this paper differs from the seminal

approach of Acemoglu (1998, 2002) by considering innovation in different characteristics of capital

goods, rather than innovation in different intermediate sectors. This new approach maintains

tractability in the putty-clay framework and leads to different research incentives when compared

to the standard model.9

In related work, Stiglitz (2014) also considers the role of innovation in generating constant

unemployment in a setting with putty-clay production. As in this paper, the long-run direction

of technical change depends on wages, which in turn depend on the rate of unemployment.10 The

current paper differs from his work in three important ways. First, in Stiglitz (2014), all innovation

is directed towards labor-augmenting technology in the steady state.11 This is inconsistent with

evidence on the declining price of investment goods (Greenwood et al., 1997; Krusell et al., 2000;

Grossman et al., 2017). Second, while there is a trade-off between different types of technology

in his framework, innovation is costless. In this sense, his model captures the notion of induced

innovation (e.g., Kennedy, 1964; Samuelson, 1965), rather than endogenous and directed technical

7The authors focus on the role of labor-saving technical change in offsetting diminishing returns and generating
endogenous growth, rather than effect of automation on labor market outcomes. See also Seater (2005) and Zuleta
(2008), who focus on social planner solutions.

8Hémous and Olsen (2016) use the task-based framework to consider the effects of automation on inequality
between workers with different skill levels, while abstracting from issues of employment. For more on automation
and inequality between different groups of workers, see Autor and Dorn (2013) and Michaels et al. (2014).

9In this way, the current paper is related to the work of Hassler et al. (2012, 2016) and Casey (2017), who use
putty-clay models of directed technical change to investigate energy efficiency. The latter paper uses a decentralized
model with similarities to the current paper.

10Relatedly, Akerlof and Stiglitz (1969) consider how savings behavior can generate constant unemployment in a
model with putty-clay production. In particular, they focus on the case where the marginal propensity to save out
of wages is lower than the marginal propensity to save out of rental income. While the mechanism is different, much
of the same intuition is at play. When unemployment increases, wages decrease and rental income increases. This
leads to greater savings and capital formation, which lowers the rate of unemployment.

11See Acemoglu (2003) for a related result that abstracts from unemployment.

4



change (e.g., Romer, 1990; Aghion and Howitt, 1992; Acemoglu, 1998, 2002). Third, I examine the

impact of a technological breakthrough, which is a primary concern in public policy discussions

(e.g., Brynjolfsson and McAfee, 2012, 2014).

By investigating a separate mechanism, this paper also complements work studying unemploy-

ment due to search and matching frictions (Pissarides, 2000; Rogerson et al., 2005). The putty-clay

model focuses on unemployment caused by the difference between the number of jobs – both filled

and vacant – and the size of the workforce, rather than the process of job separation and matching.

To highlight the important growth mechanisms and maintain tractability, the model incorporates

matching and bargaining in a simple manner abstracts from search frictions. Much can be gained

from future work that integrates the technology-driven unemployment with other models of equilib-

rium unemployment.12 The most natural synthesis is likely to occur with matching models in which

purchases of capital create vacancies, implying that the underlying production function is Leontief

(e.g., Acemoglu and Shimer, 1999; Acemoglu, 2001). To this set-up, the putty-clay model examines

two types of technologies, a labor-augmenting technology that lowers the labor input requirement

for each capital good and a capital-augmenting technology that expands economic production and

increases the demand for labor.

3 Model

3.1 Environment

3.1.1 Production

Final output is produced under perfect competition. As is standard in the endogenous growth

literature, there are a continuum of capital goods. These capital goods are combined with land and

labor to produce final output. The aggregate production function is given by

Yt =

∫ 1
0

min
[
Xt(i)

αM1−α, AL,t(i)Lt(i)
]
di, (1)

where Xt(i) is the quantity of capital good i, M
1−α is natural capital (e.g., land), and Lt(i) is labor

hired to work with capital good i. Labor-augmenting technical change, AL,t(i), determines the

labor requirement of capital good i. Technology is embodied in the capital goods. The minimum

function captures the rigid ‘clay’ properties of installed capital. Specifically, there is no substitution

between capital and labor after capital goods are installed. As will be discussed below, substitution

occurs via the choice of technology.

12Aghion and Howitt (1994) and Mortensen (2005) examine the relationship between creative destruction and
unemployment in models with endogenous, but undirected, growth and search and matching frictions. The current
model abstracts from these Schumpeterian forces.

5



Each type of capital good is produced by a single monopolist. The efficiency of capital good

production is given by AK,t(i). Thus, market clearing for capital is given by∫ 1
0

Xt(i)

AK,t(i)
di ≤ Kt, (2)

where Kt is aggregate capital (i.e., saved output). This type of technology is capital-augmenting

and capital-saving.13 As will be discussed in the next section, capital good producers can improve

technological characteristics through R&D investment.

Aggregate employment is given by

Lt ≡
∫ 1

0
Lt(i)di ≤ Nt, (3)

where Nt is the (exogenous) size of the labor force at time t. The putty-clay production structure

creates the possibility of unemployment due to saturation of labor demand. Once a firm has

installed a fixed quantity of capital goods with associated technological characteristics, it can only

support a finite number of workers with positive marginal product. This logic extends to the

entire economy, implying that the nature of technology and level of capital accumulation create an

upper bound on employment. Formally, we can capture this intuition by specifying the constraint

AL,t(i)Lt(i) ≤ Xt(i)αM1−α ∀i.14

Standard neoclassical production functions differ from the putty-clay approach by allowing

substitution between capital and labor after capital goods are installed. While this is a useful and

convenient assumption for most economic analyses, it is an impediment to the study of technology-

driven unemployment. In particular, the standard model assumes that an unlimited number of

workers can each use a fixed set of specific capital goods. This is an unrealistic assumption that

shuts down an important potential source unemployment that is closely related to labor-saving

technical change. Specifically, equations (1) and (3) imply that, holding all else equal, advances

in labor-saving (i.e., labor-augmenting) technology will increase unemployment. On a balanced

growth path, these reductions in potential employment are offset by economic expansion, which

occurs via the accumulation of capital goods.

3.1.2 Research and Development

Monopolists can hire R&D inputs to improve either capital- or labor-saving technology. In either

case, technology evolves according to

AJ,t(i) =
(
1 + ηJRJ(i)

)
AJ,t−1, (4)

13A long literature examines the existence and implications of this investment-specific technical change (e.g.,
Greenwood et al., 1997; Krusell et al., 2000; Cummins and Violante, 2002; Grossman et al., 2017). The model
presented here is isomorphic to one in which AK,t(i) appears in the final good production function and the efficiency
of capital good production is constant.

14Given the structure of wage bargaining in the model, this constraint is technically redundant.

6



where J = K,L, RJ,t(i) are research inputs hired by firm i to improve technology characteristic

J , and AJ,t−1 =
∫ 1

0 AJ,t−1(i) di.
15 Patents last for one period, after which technology flows freely

between firms. Thus, the properties of new technologies depend on the amount of research inputs

hired, as well as the aggregate state of technology.16

There are a unit mass of research inputs in all periods. As a result, market clearing is given by∫ 1
0
RL,t(i)di+

∫ 1
0
RK,t(i)di = 1. (5)

I also define RJ,t ≡
∫ 1

0 RJ,t(i)di, J = K,L for simplicity.
17

3.1.3 Individuals

The consumer side of the problem is standard. The representative household chooses

{Ct}∞t=0 = argmax
∞∑
t=0

βtNt
c̃1−ξt
1− ξ

, (6)

where c̃t = Ct/Nt is consumption per person. I focus on the decentralized equilibrium where the

household takes prices and technology levels as given. For simplicity, I also focus on the case of

full depreciation. The simulation exercises use a period length of ten years. The relevant budget

constraint is given by

Ct +Kt+1 = wtLt + rtKt + pR,t + Πt + pM,tM = Yt, (7)

where wt is wages, rt is the rental rate on capital, pR,t is the rental rate for R&D inputs, pM,t is

the rental rate for land, and Πt is total profits. The labor force grows at a constant and exogenous

rate

Nt+1 = (1 + n)Nt. (8)

3.1.4 Wage Determination

Firms install capital before they hire workers. Each worker has marginal product AL,t(i), and they

bargain with the final good producer to determine how much of that marginal product they keep

in wages. Workers receive higher wages when they (a) have more bargaining power, (b) are more

15R&D inputs could be scientists, research labs, etc.
16A convenient alternative would be for firms to build on the best available technology. If firms only maximize

single period profits, these two specifications are isomorphic.
17The assumption of a fixed set of research inputs is commonly made in the directed technical change literature

(e.g., Acemoglu, 2003; Acemoglu et al., 2012; Hassler et al., 2016). It is a stand in for two offsetting forces, an increase
in aggregate research inputs and an increase in the cost of generating a given aggregate growth rate (Jones, 1995b,
2002; Bloom et al., 2016). For the expositional purposes of this paper, this simplifying assumption is quite useful.
To extend the current model to quantitative analysis of specific policy interventions, it would be profitable to include
either aspects of semi-endogenous growth (e.g., Jones, 1995a; Kortum, 1997; Segerstrom, 1998) or allow the entry of
new capital goods (Peretto, 1998; Dinopoulos and Thompson, 1998; Howitt, 1999).

7



productive, or (c) have better outside options. Outside options improve when labor markers are

tighter (i.e., unemployment is lower) or average productivity in other jobs is higher.

There are many possible bargaining technologies that could determine the actual wage schedule.

To be consistent with balanced growth, I assume that the bargaining process yields wages according

to

wt(i) = χAL,t(i) + χΓ(ut)AL,t, (9)

where ut = 1 − LtNt and Γ
′(ut) < 0. In words, χ captures the bargaining power of the worker, and

Γ(ut) captures the difficulty of getting another job if an agreement cannot be reached. Appendix

Section A.4 presents a simple microfoundation using Nash bargaining.

Consider the determination of wages in the standard continuous time search and matching

model of unemployment with Nash bargaining (e.g., Pissarides, 2000). In that model, workers are

paid a fraction of their marginal product plus their reservation wage, which is determined in part

by the value of unemployment. The value of unemployment, in turn, depends on how difficult it

is to get a new job and the potential wage that could be negotiated in that job. Expression (9)

captures this intuition. The important difference with the continuous time model is that there is

an explicit expression for wages in terms of productivity and unemployment. This allows for a

tractable investigation of endogenous and directed technical change.

3.2 Optimization

As demonstrated in Appendix Section A.1.1, the inverse demand for physical capital has the familiar

iso-elastic form,

pX,t(i) = α[1−
wt(i)

AL,t(i)
]Xt(i)

α−1M1−α. (10)

Intuitively, this occurs because physical capital is combined with natural capital in a Cobb-Douglas

manner. The overall demand for capital maintains this functional form, but is adjusted for payments

to labor. The final good producer must employ labor to run each unit of the capital good. Thus,

the demand for capital depends on the operation cost.

The iso-elastic demand yields convenient analytic expressions. Capital good producers set prices

as a constant markup over unit costs:

pX,t(i) =
1

α

rt
AK,t(i)

. (11)

Appendix Section A.1.2 derives the behavior of capital good producers. Profits from capital good

production are given by

π̄X,t(i) = (1−
1

α
)α

2
1−αAK,t(i)

α
1−α r

−α
1−α
t [1− χ− χ

Γ(ut)AL,t
AL,t(i)

]
1

1−αM. (12)

8



This is again a standard expression adjusted for payments to labor. Capital good producers choose

research inputs to maximize these profits, subject to the research production function given in

equation (4).

Importantly, the two types of technology enter the profit function with different functional

forms. Capital good producers benefit from sales of the capital goods, but not payments to labor.

They only care about labor input costs to the degree that they affect the demand for capital goods.

In particular, improvements in labor-saving technical change have a negative and convex effect on

the input cost. This fact plays an important role in guaranteeing the existence of balanced growth

path.

The research arbitrage equation is given by

pLR,t

pXR,t
=

χΓ(ut)AL,tAK,t(i)

[1− χ− χΓ(ut)AL,tAL,t(i) ]AL,t(i)
2

ηLAL,t−1
ηKAK,t−1

, (13)

where pJR,t is the rental rate paid to R&D inputs used to improve technology J . Given that R&D

inputs are mobile across sectors, factor payments are equal in equilibrium.

In some dimensions, the research arbitrage equation resembles the standard directed technical

change model (Acemoglu, 1998, 2002). As expected, the relative value of improving labor-saving

technical change, AL,t(i), is increasing in the wage, the relative efficiency of R&D production, and

in the value of the other technology, AK,t(i). Moreover, χ + χ
Γ(ut)AL,t
AL,t(i)

is the labor cost per unit

of output, and higher labor cost increase incentives for labor-saving technical change. In other

dimensions, the research incentives differ from those in the standard model. In particular, the

relative cost of inputs also enters through χΓ(ut)AL,t in the numerator and the square of labor-

efficiency in the denominator. This asymmetry is driven by the fact that technology is embodied in

the capital good. Also, there are no market size effects. Factor accumulation only matters via the

unemployment rate, which affect wages. The task-based model of Acemoglu and Restrepo (2016)

also features a research arbitrage equation that is driven by price effects, but not market size effects.

The consumer maximization problem yields the following Euler equation

c̃t+1
c̃t

= βrt+1, (14)

which is standard.

3.3 Substitution between Capital and Labor

In this section, I take a brief detour to discuss two important features of the model: factor substitu-

tion and the technology menu. Together, these features highlight the close relationship between the

putty-clay model and more standard approaches. Despite the ex post Leontief production function,

the putty-clay model still features substitution between capital and labor. This substitution occurs

via the choice of technology. Figure 1 highlights this process.

9



It is helpful to note that all capital good producers face an identical problem and will make

identical decisions. Since there are a unit mass of capital good producers, RJ,t(i) = RJ,t and

AJ,t(i) = AJ,t ∀J, t, i. Thus, I will drop the i subscripts for everything that follows. Market clearing
implies that Yt = min[(AK,tKt)

αM1−α, AL,tLt]. Since δ = 1, the minimum function will be satisfied

with equality in all periods.

After capital goods are installed, technology parameters are fixed. There is a minimum amount

of labor and capital needed to produce a given amount of output. The isoquant for producing a

given amount of output, Ȳ , is given by the following correspondence:

K̄ =


[ Ȳ

1
α

AK,t
,∞] if Lt = ȲAL,t

Ȳ
1
α

AK,t
if Lt >

Ȳ
AL,t

∅ otherwise,

(15)

where I have normalized M to one for convenience. I will maintain this assumption through this

section. Panel (a) plots the isoquants in (K,L) space. It demonstrates the defining property of

Leontief production: there is no ex post substitution between capital and labor. The presence of

land implies that the corners of the isoquants to not follow a straight line out from the origin.

Prior to the installation of capital goods, there exists a menu of potential technology pairs. In

particular, the resource constraint for R&D inputs implies that 1 = RL,t +RK,t. Together with the

law of motion of technology, equation (4), this can be rewritten as

η̃AK,t−1 = AK,t +
AK,t−1
AL,t−1

ηK
ηL
AL,t, (16)

where η̃ = ηK(1 +
1
ηK

+ 1ηL ) is constant. Capital good producers take lagged technology levels as

given. Thus, the technology menu captures the feasibility constraint in allocating R&D resources.

Given that technology must be strictly increasing, there is an additional constraint that AJ,t ≥
AJ,t−1 ∀t, J . In each period, AK,t−1 increases, which demonstrates the expansion of the production
possibility frontier for technologies. In the long-run, the two technologies will not grow at the same

rate, implying that the trade-off between technologies changes over time.

Equation (16) highlights how the putty-clay models resembles earlier literature with a distribu-

tion of different types of capital goods (e.g., Samuelson, 1962; Jones, 2005; Caselli and Coleman,

2006). Unlike the existing literature, the entire menu of cutting-edge technologies is not freely

available. Instead, capital good producers must hire R&D inputs to create the new technologies.

As a result, only one technology pair will actually materialize. Since R&D inputs are distinct from

production inputs, it will always be profitable to use a cutting-edge technology.

10



Y = Ȳ1

Y = Ȳ2

L

K

(a) Ex post substitution

Y = Ȳ1

Y = Ȳ2

L

K

(b) Ex ante substitution

Expansion Path

Y = Ȳ1

Y = Ȳ2

L

K

(c) Expansion path

Y = Ȳ1

Y = Ȳ2

Expansion Path

Y = Ȳ1

Y = Ȳ2

L

K

(d) Ex post and ex ante substitution

Figure 1: This figures demonstrates that, despite the Leontief production function, there is still substitution between
capital and labor. Panel (a) presents the isoquants for the final good producer, who takes technology as given. Panel
(b) presents the isoquants when considering the ability of the capital good producers to choose from the technology
menu. The expansion path, presented in panel (c), is determined by the profit maximizing behavior of the capital
good producer. Finally, panel (d) combines the results.

The technology menu demonstrates the possibility for ex ante substitution between capital and

labor. When considering the choice of technology, the relationship given in (15) becomes

K̄ =


Ȳ

1
α

η̃AK,t−1−
AK,t−1
AL,t−1

Ȳ
Lt

if Lt ∈ [ Ȳ(1+ηL)AL,t−1 ,
Ȳ

AL,t−1
]

∅ otherwise,
(17)

which defines the smooth curves given in panel (b). Thus, the putty-clay model allows for smooth

substitution between capital and labor, much like the standard neoclassical growth model. This

substitution, however, occurs via the choice of technology, and it is not possible to substitute factors

after capital goods are installed.

11



Capital good producers choose technology pairs to maximize profits. The optimal decision is

given in equation (13).18 Once these technological parameters are set, the expansion path is given

by Kt =
A

1
α
L,t

AK,t
L

1
α
t , which follows from the fact that Yt = AL,tLt =

(
AK,tKt

)α
M1−α ∀t. This is

shown in panel (c). Once capital good producers have chosen a point on the technology menu, they

sell specific capital goods to the final good producer. The final good producers only have access to

the Leontief technology, as depicted in panel (d).

3.4 Dynamics

In this subsection, I analyze the dynamics of the economy. Compared to the standard neoclassical

set-up, the putty-clay model of directed technical change adds unemployment and endogenous

technological progress, while removing the standard ex post substitution between labor and installed

capital. Despite these changes, the analysis uses familiar steps, which allows the new model to

remain tractable and transparent.

Noting that all monopolists make identical decisions, market clearing condition (2) implies that

the aggregate production function for the economy can be written as

Yt = min[(AK,tKt)
αM1−α, AL,tLt]. (18)

The case of excess savings is ruled out by the assumption of perfect depreciation.19 Thus, Yt =(
AK,tKt

)α
M1−α ∀t. Of course, this formulation looks quite similar to the standard neoclassical

model, except that land is replacing labor and capital-augmenting technology is replacing labor-

augmenting technology. As a result, the usual intensive-form approach to solving the model will

be useful.

Define zt =
Zt

A
α

1−α
K,t M

for any variable Zt. Now,

yt = k
α
t , (19)

as in the standard neoclassical growth model. Moreover, equation (7) implies that the law of motion

for capital is given by Kt+1 = Yt − Ct. In intensive form,

kt+1 =
yt − ct

(1 + gK,t+1)
α

1−α
. (20)

Similarly, the Euler equation, (14), gives

ct+1
ct

=
βrt+1(1 + n)

ξ

(1 + gK,t+1)
ξα

1−α
. (21)

18This decision is also captured in equation (24), which is discussed in the next section.
19This is a sufficient, but not necessary, condition.

12



Both of these expressions are relatively standard, except that population growth appears in an

unusual way. This occurs because the intensive form is not normalized by population. More-

over, capital-augmenting, rather than labor-augmenting, technology determines the evolution of

the intensive form.

The results thus far highlight the benefit of including land in the production function. In

addition to being realistic, including land gives the model a familiar set of dynamic equations. This

occurs because there are diminishing returns to physical capital, even within the first argument of

the production function.

To close the model, it is necessary to bring in the newer elements, unemployment and tech-

nological progress. To start, consider the real interest rate. Note that in equilibrium wtAL,t(i) =

χ+ χΓ(ut) ∀i. Thus, the real interest rate is given by

rt = α
2[1− χ− χΓ(ut)]kα−1t , (22)

which is again similar to the standard neoclassical growth model with monopolistic competition.

The difference is that the real interest rate must be adjusted for payments to labor, which depend

on the unemployment rate. Higher unemployment leads to lower wages, increasing the value of

capital from the perspective of the final good producer.

Now, I establish the more unique portions of the model, the dynamics of technology and

unemployment. Considering (18) and noting that the minimum function is met with equality,

1− ut = LtNt =
(AK,tKt)

αM1−α

AL,tNt
. This yields

1− ut+1
1− ut

=
(1 + gK,t+1)

α
1−α

(1 + gL,t+1)(1 + n)
·
(kt+1
kt

)α
. (23)

This equation captures the division between labor-saving and labor-using forces discussed in Sub-

section 3.1.1. Technology-driven unemployment exists because of the finite quantity of capital and

specific labor-input requirements. A finite number of workers have positive marginal product, lead-

ing to unemployment when bargaining ensures a positive wage. Unemployment decreases when

economic production expands via the accumulation of capital goods, which results from saving or

capital-saving technological progress. Conversely, labor-saving technology increases the unemploy-

ment, as does population growth.

Now, I consider the dynamics of technology. Let gJ,t ≡
AJ,t
AJ,t−1

− 1, J = K,L. Again noting that
all monopolists make identical decisions, equation (4) yields

gL,t =
1

1 + Γ̃(ut)

(
ηL
ηK

+ ηL − Γ̃(ut)
)
, (24)

where Γ̃(ut) =
α
(

1−χ−χΓ(ut)
)

χΓ(ut)
, for any interior solution.20 Since Γ̃(ut) is strictly increasing in ut, the

growth rate of labor-saving technological change is decreasing in the unemployment rate. When

20See Appendix Section A.1.3 for a formal derivation.

13



unemployment falls, wages rise, generating greater incentives for producers to economize on labor

inputs. Finally, applying the market clearing condition (5) yields

gK,t = ηK −
ηK
ηL
gL,t, (25)

which captures the trade-off between the two types of technological progress.

Proposition 1. The dynamics of the economy are given by a sequence {yt, kt, ct, rt, ut, gL,t, gK,t}∞t=0
that solves equations (19) – (25) for all periods t = 0, 1, 2 . . ., together with initial conditions u−1

and k0.

Proof. The proposition follows from the preceding discussion.

3.5 Balanced Growth Path

3.5.1 Characterization

In this subsection, I characterize the balanced growth path and highlight the key forces in the

model. Throughout the remainder of the paper, I use asterisks to denote balanced growth levels.

Definition 1. A balanced growth path (BGP) occurs when output, consumption, capital and tech-

nology all grow at constant rates.

One of the primary goals of this paper is to understand the forces that generate constant

unemployment in the presence of labor-saving technical change.

Remark. On any BGP, the rate of unemployment is constant.

Proof. The remark follows from equation (24) and the definition of a BGP.

If the direction of technological progress is determined by profit-maximizing firms, investment in

labor-saving technology will increase when labor costs are high. Labor costs, in turn, depend on

unemployment. On a BGP, relative incentives for R&D in the two types of technology must be

constant, implying that the unemployment rate must also be constant. Incentives for investment

are captured by equation (24), which is derived from the research arbitrage equation (13).

With constant unemployment and technological growth rates, equations (19) – (22) are es-

sentially identical to the standard neoclassical growth model with monopolistic competition and

constant population. As a result, the steady state of this system will also exhibit the usual prop-

erties.

Remark. On any BGP, the intensive-form representation of the economy must be in a steady

state. This implies that aggregate variables Kt, Yt, and Ct grow at factor (1 + g
∗
K)

α
1−α and that the

real interest rate is constant.

14



Proof. Equation (24) implies that the unemployment rate must be constant on a BGP. By definition,

the technology growth rates are also constant. By equation (23), therefore, kt must also be constant.

This directly implies that yt must also be constant by equation (19). With both kt and ut constant,

rt must also be constant by equation (22), which implies that ct must be constant by equation

(21).

As noted in the previous subsection, these results highlight the importance of including land in the

production function. The diminishing returns to effective capital imply that the dynamical system

has all of the usual properties, even before considering the role of labor inputs.

I now turn to examing the link between the two types of technical change.

Remark. On any BGP,

(1 + n)(1 + g∗L) = (1 + g
∗
K)

α
1−α , (26)

which implies that aggregate variables Kt, Yt, and Ct grow at factor (1 + n)(1 + g
∗
L) as in the

standard neoclassical growth model.

Proof. The result follows from equation (23) and the preceding remark.

The putty-clay model of directed technical change converges to the usual BGP and explains the

standard stylized macroeconomic facts (Solow, 1994; Jones, 2016). In particular, the capital-output

ratio, savings rate, and interest rate will all be constant. Moreover, output per worker and capital

per worker will grow at the same constant rate.

This result further highlights the importance of directed technical change. The BGP relationship

between the two types of technical change is driven by the requirement that unemployment be

constant, which is guaranteed by research arbitrage. Thus, directed technical change is essential to

explaining both the constant unemployment rate and the standard BGP stylized facts.

Combing equations (25) and (26) yields

(1 + ηK −
ηK
ηL
g∗L,t)

α
1−α = (1 + g∗L)(1 + n), (27)

which immediately implies that the BGP growth rate of labor-augmenting technology is unique.

For the remainder of the analysis, I impose

(1 + n) > (1 + ηK)
α

1−α , (A1)

such that g∗L > 0, which is the empirically relevant case.

Now, equation (23) implies that the BGP unemployment rate is unique. In particular,

u∗ = arg solve

{
g∗L −

1

1 + Γ̃(u∗)

(
ηL
ηK

+ ηL − Γ̃(u∗)
)

= 0

}
, (28)

15



where g∗L is given by the implicit solution to equation (27). Together, equations (27) and (28)

demonstrate how the steady state unemployment rate is ‘driven’ by technology.21 With unique

rates of unemployment and technological progress, equations (19) – (22), the more standard aspects

of the dynamical system, also have a unique steady-state.

Remark. The balanced growth path is unique.

Proof. The remark follows from the preceding discussion.

To complete the characterization of the BGP, I now turn to analyzing factor shares, which I

denote with κQ,t for any factor Q. At all times, Yt = AL,tLt. Together with the fact that all capital

good producers make identical decisions, this yields

κL,t =
wt
AL,t

= χ+ χΓ(ut), (29)

which is constant on the BGP. Intuitively, the faction of output paid to workers is constant when

the worker bargaining position is constant. This occurs when unemployment reaches its steady

state value. The income shares of capital and land are given by

κK,t = α
2[1− χ− χΓ(ut)], (30)

κM,t = (1− α)[1− χ− χΓ(ut)], (31)

which are both constant on the BGP. As shown in Appendix Section A.1.2, the income share of

R&D inputs is given by

κR,t = α
2[1− χ− χΓ(ut)]

ηK
1 + gK,t

, (32)

which is again constant on the BGP. All remaining income is paid out as profits to the capital good

producers.

All of the results discussed above are summarized in Proposition 2.

Proposition 2. There exists a unique balanced growth path, where each of the following holds

true:

1. The relationship between technological growth rates is given by (1 +n)(1 + g∗L) = (1 + g
∗
K)

α
1−α .

2. The unemployment rate is constant, which implies that aggregate employment grows at factor

(1 + n).

21The model focuses on this type of technology-driven unemployment and demonstrates how the forces of technical
change and factor accumulation balance to yield a constant rate of unemployment. Of course, there are other factors,
especially search and matching frictions, that contribute to unemployment. Existing work already demonstrates how
these factors balance to yield a steady state rate of unemployment in the absence of labor-saving technical change
(Pissarides, 2000; Rogerson et al., 2005). The current paper abstracts from matching frictions to focus on the role of
technology. Integrating these two approaches to unemployment presents a particularly interesting avenue for future
work.

16



3. The real interest rate is constant.

4. Kt, Yt, and Ct grow at factor (1 + n)(1 + g
∗
L), which implies that the capital-output ratio is

fixed and that capital per worker and output per worker grow at constant rate g∗L.

5. Factor shares are constant.

Proof. The proposition follows from the preceding discussion.

3.5.2 Comparative Statics

In this section, I discuss the effects of an increase in ηL, which captures the notion of a technological

breakthrough. I am interested in three outcomes: the growth rate of labor productivity, the

unemployment rate, and the labor share of income. The formal analysis is presented in Appendix

Section A.3. In the appendix, I also discuss the comparative statics following from changes in χ

and n. These results are discussed in Section 4.

Building on the law of motion for unemployment and market clearing for R&D resources, equa-

tion (27) describes a necessary condition for constant unemployment that is independent of incen-

tives for R&D expenditure. From this equation, it is immediate that a technological breakthrough

will increase the growth rate of labor productivity, g∗L. Breakthroughs also affect the capital good

producers’ incentives for R&D investment, as demonstrated in equation (28). The unemployment

rate affects the incentives for R&D investment, but does not appear in equation (27). The overall

effect of a technological breakthrough on unemployment, therefore, depends on the magnitude of

the change in incentives, as captured by equation (28), relative to the relationship given by equation

(27).

In the most intuitive case, the unemployment rate increases following a breakthrough. A suffi-

cient condition for this outcome is given by

(
1 +

1

ηK

) 1
1 + Γ̃(u∗)

> 1. (A2)

The left hand side captures the change in incentives. Appendix Section A.3 shows that
dg∗L
dηL

< 1. A

key goal of the calibration in Section 4.1 is to show that this condition is satisfied in the data. As

demonstrated in equation (29), technological breakthroughs affect the labor share of income only

via unemployment. When unemployment rises, the bargaining position of workers deteriorates,

leading to a fall in the labor share.

Proposition 3. A technological breakthrough leads to faster growth in labor-productivity, i.e.
dg∗L
dηL

>

0. Also, if Assumption (A2) holds, then du
∗

dηL
> 0 and

dκ∗L
dηL

< 0.

Proof. See Appendix Section A.3.

17



3.6 Efficiency and the Transition Path

In this paper, I examine the welfare-relevant trade-offs induced by labor-saving technical change.

It is beyond the scope of this paper to provide of theory of how to aggregate, say, simultaneous

increases in unemployment and output per capita into a social welfare function. Despite these

reservations, there is a fundamental sense in which investment in labor-saving technical change is

socially inefficient in the presence of technology-induced unemployment. Labor-saving technical

change is wasteful because it saves a resources, labor, that is not scarce. Policy could increase total

output by redirecting R&D inputs towards labor-using technology and employing a greater number

of workers.

Remark. Consider an economy at some point t where Kt, Nt, and AJ,t−1, J = K,L are given.

If Lt < Nt and RL,t > 0, then it is possible to increase total output and decrease unemployment by

shifting some R&D resources to RK,t.

Proof. It will always be the case that
(
AK,t(i)Xt(i)

)α
M1−α = AL,t(i)Lt(i) ∀i. Let � > 0 be

arbitrarily small. Decreasing RL,t(i) by � and adding these resources to RK,t(i) increases potential

output by αAK,t(i)
αXt(i)

α−1M1−αηKAK,t−1� > 0. Then, to increase actual output, it is necessary

to employ more workers to ensure that the arguments of the production function are equal. Since

Lt < Nt, this must be feasible for an arbitrarily small �.

The task-based model of Acemoglu and Restrepo (2016) also yields inefficiently high investment

in labor-saving technologies. In that alternate setting, it is the labor supply decision that drives

the inefficiency, and technologies are not factor-augmenting. The fact that two different approaches

yield the same qualitative result reinforces the generality of this finding.

The inefficiency of labor-saving R&D investment plays an important role in the transition

dynamics of the putty-clay model. In particular, technological breakthroughs create incentives for

capital good producers to invest more heavily in labor-saving technologies. This will boost the

long-run growth rate of the economy, but exacerbate short-run inefficiencies.

Proposition 4. Consider an economy on a BGP at some point t, where Kt, Nt, and AJ,t−1 J =

K,L are given. An exogenous increase in ηL lowers output and increases unemployment in the

short-run, relative to a baseline scenario without this exogenous shock. It also increases the growth

rate of labor productivity and decreases the labor share of income.

Proof. Research allocations are interior on the BGP. Thus, equation (24) must hold before the

shock. This implies that an increase in ηL leads to an increase in both ut and gL,t (it is not possible

to have one without the other). By the resource constraint for R&D inputs, this leads to a decrease

in gK,t, as demonstrated in equation (25). Since Yt =
(
AK,tKt

)α
M1−α, output decreases in the

short run.22

22The proof relies on the assumption that the amount of R&D inputs is fixed. This assumption is particularly
realistic in the short run. As discussed in footnote 17, over longer horizons, fixed research inputs are a convenient
stand in for the offsetting forces of diminishing R&D productivity and increasing research inputs.

18



4 Simulation

In this section, I present the calibration and simulation of the model. The calibration makes it

possible to confirm that Assumption (A2) is satisfied in the data. The simulation allows for a more

thorough investigation of the transition path when compared to the theoretical results presented

in Section 3.6. The main analysis focuses on the effects of technological breakthrough, but I also

explore the consequences of changes in bargaining institutions, captured by χ, and population

growth.

It is necessary to assume a function form for Γ(ut). I assume

wt(i) = χAL,t(i) + χν(1− ut)AL,t. (33)

Here, ν captures the relative importance of outside options in the bargaining process. The term

1− ut captures the notion that increase in unemployment lead to lower wages.
The calibration procedure leaves one free parameter. Thus, I set the ratio ηKηL exogenously.

To separately identify these two parameters, it would be necessary to observe how R&D inputs

within firms are divided between labor-saving and capital-saving technical change. For the baseline

analysis, I assume that ηK = ηL. I also show that none of the key results are driven by this

assumption. In this sense, the purpose of the calibration is to constrain, rather than estimate, the

parameters of the model.

4.1 Calibration

As demonstrated in Section 3.5, the BGP of the putty-clay model closely resembles the standard

neoclassical growth model. To calibrate the model, I use aggregate data from the United States. I

take the period length to be ten years. Three parameters can be determined exogenously. I start

by assuming log preferences, i.e., ξ = 1. I take β = .860 from Golosov et al. (2014), which uses an

identical period length. Using data on the size of the labor force from the Bureau of Labor Statistics

(BLS), I take n = 0.15 (1.4% per year). Details on data sources can be found in Appendix Section

A.5.

Together with the exogenous ratio ηKηL , a simple calibration procedure uses four equations to

calibrate the remaining five unknown parameters, {ηK , ηL, χ, ν, α}. The steps of the calibration
closely follow the discussion on the uniqueness of the BGP in Section 3.5.1. As noted above, I

assume that the research productivities are equal in the main analysis and demonstrate that all

results are robust to alternate values.

As usual, α can be identified from factor shares. Combining equations (29) and (31) yields

κ∗M = (1− α)(1− κ∗L). (34)

Taking κ∗M = 5% and κ
∗
L = 67% from Valentinyi and Herrendorf (2008) gives α = 0.85. The

structure of the model yields a strict relationship between the technological growth rates on the

19



Table 1: Calibrated Parameters

Parameter Value Description Target Source

α 0.85 Physical capital share (excl. labor) κ∗M Valentinyi and Herrendorf (2008)
η 0.31 R&D efficiency g∗L BLS
χν 0.41 Bargaining power u∗ BLS
ν 1.43 Bargaining power κ∗L Valentinyi and Herrendorf (2008)

BGP given in equation (27), which is reproduced below for convenience:

(1 + ηK −
ηK
ηL
g∗L)

α
1−α = (1 + n)(1 + g∗L).

This relationship captures the fact that labor-saving and labor-using technical change exactly bal-

ance in the long-run, resulting in constant unemployment. Taking g∗L = 0.24 (2.2% per year) from

BLS data on labor productivity yields ηK = ηL = 0.31.

The remaining parameters, χ and ν, capture worker bargaining power and the importance of

outside options in the bargaining process. Their product can be identified from the relationship

between the growth rate of labor-saving technical change and unemployment. I re-write equations

(28), (29), (33) as

g∗L =
1

1 +
α(1−κ∗L)
χν(1−u∗)

(
ηL
ηK

+ ηL −
α(1− κ∗L)
χν(1− u∗)

)
. (35)

Combining the previous results with an estimate of u∗ = 5.5% from the BLS data implies that

χν = 0.34. Finally, rearranging (29) with the functional form given by (33) yields

χ = κ∗L − χν(1− u∗), (36)

which implies that χ = 0.34 and ν = 1.43.

Table 1 summarizes the results. It is important to note that
(
1 + 1ηK

)
1

1+Γ̃(u∗)
= 2.28 > 1, which

implies that du
∗

dηL
> 0 and

dκ∗L
dηL

< 0. In words, technological breakthroughs increase unemployment

and decrease the labor share of income.

For robustness, I also consider alternate assumptions about research productivity. The model

and calibration procedure place an upper bound on the ηKηL . For example, Assumption (A1) de-

scribes a limit the size of ηK that must hold for the model to yield interior research allocations

on the BGP. This condition is not binding. Equation (36) places an upper bound on χν, which is

inversely related to ηL as shown in equation (35). Thus, I show that all results are robust to setting

χν ≈ κ
∗
L

1−u∗ . This yields ηL = 0.28, ηK = 0.56 and ν = 1.01. Also,
(
1 + 1ηK

)
1

1+Γ̃(u∗)
= 1.95 > 1.

There is no lower bound on the ratio of research productivities. I present results with ηKηL = 0.5 to

demonstrate the qualitative effect that low ηL has on the transition path.
23

23In this case, ηK = 0.19, ηL = .37, χ = 0.51, and ν = 0.34. Also,
(
1 + 1

ηK

)
1

1+Γ̃(u∗)
= 2.34 > 1.

20



4.2 Technological Breakthrough

I start by tracing out the dynamic impacts of a 10% increase in ηL. This represents a technological

breakthrough that permanently decreases the cost of creating new labor-saving technologies. The

results are presented in Figure 2. Given the difficulty of quantifying a technological breakthrough,

the primary goal of this analysis is to understand the qualitative features of the transition path

and steady state.

An increase in ηL leads to greater investment in labor-saving technologies. Since labor-saving

technology also makes workers more productive, the growth rate of worker productivity increases,

as demonstrated in panel (a). An increase in the rate of labor-saving technical change also leads

to higher unemployment, as shown in panel (b). This is the fundamental trade-off associated with

labor-saving technical change: when worker productivity increases, fewer workers are needed to

operate the existing capital stock, holding all else equal. In the long-run, employed workers see

faster wage growth, but a greater fraction of workers cannot find a job. Thus, there is a strong

equity-efficiency trade-off associated with a technological breakthrough, even when looking within

a homogeneous group of workers.

Panel (c) demonstrates the impact of a technological breakthrough on the labor share of income.

Since higher unemployment lowers the bargaining power of workers, the labor share of income

decreases. In this way, labor-saving technical change also induces an equity-efficiency trade-off

when considering the distribution of income between factors of production.

Panel (d) shows results from three important aggregate variables that are relevant to the well-

being of workers: total output, wages, and the total wage bill. As demonstrated in Section 3.6, an

unexpected technological breakthrough leads to a short-run decrease in output. The formal proof

took advantage of the fact that capital accumulation and lagged technologies were held constant

in the very short run (i.e., within a period). The simulation demonstrates that it may take several

periods before the economy catches up to where it would have been without the breakthrough. The

breakthrough, however, permanently increases the growth rate of labor productivity. Thus, output

eventually grows faster than in the original steady state.

The short-run reductions are even larger for the wage bill, since both output and the labor share

decrease. The effect on wages, however, is more complicated. The increase in productivity pushes

up wages, but the increase in unemployment undermines worker bargaining power, pushing them

down. The net effect cannot be determined from the theoretical analysis. It is the only qualitative

outcome that is sensitive the the exogenously determined ratio of research efficiencies. In the main

analysis, where the research efficiencies are equal prior to the breakthrough, wages are essentially

unchanged in the short-run, implying that these two forces offset. When the ratio ηKηL is low, wages

increase rapidly following a shock (Figure A.1). When ηKηL is high, wages decrease following the

shock (Figure A.4). In all cases, the wage bill decreases sharply and remains below baseline for

many periods.24

24These results also show how factor-augmenting technologies can effectively capture the notion of labor-saving
technical change when putty-clay production is taken into account. With a standard neoclassical production function

21



1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Period

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

0.3

(a) Labor Prod. Growth

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Period

0

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

0.1

0.12

(b) Unemployment

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Period

0.5

0.55

0.6

0.65

0.7

0.75

(c) Labor Share

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Period

0.96

0.98

1

1.02

1.04

1.06

1.08

1.1

1.12

1.14

Baseline
Wages
Wage Bill
Output

(d) Output and Wages

Figure 2: This figures traces the impact of a technological breakthrough that increases ηL by 10%. All results are
presented relative to a baseline scenario without a breakthrough. The economy starts on a balanced growth path.

4.3 Bargaining Institutions

The putty-clay model of directed technical change also presents a natural environment in which to

study the effect of changes in bargaining institutions. In particular, I examine the effect of a 3.5%

decrease in χ, which is almost sufficient to eliminate technology-driven unemployment. The results

are presented in Figure 3.

Equation (27) demonstrates that a change in bargaining institutions has no long-run effect on the

growth rate of labor productivity.25 The BGP condition for relative rates of technological progress

is unrelated to incentives for R&D investment. Panel (a) suggests that changes in bargaining

institutions, even when large enough to almost eliminate technology-driven unemployment, also do

where all factors are paid their marginal products, factor-augmenting technologies almost always increase the marginal
product of all factors (Acemoglu, 2010; Acemoglu and Autor, 2011). This fact has motivated the existing literature
to focus on task-based models of automation (Acemoglu and Restrepo, 2016; Hémous and Olsen, 2016). In the
putty-clay framework, the wages of some workers go to zero as labor-augmenting technology improves. This implies
that labor-augmenting technological change is also labor-saving, a fact which drives the trade-offs central to the this
model. Moreover, wages for employed workers can also decrease following a shock, but this result depends on the
calibrated parameters.

25See Appendix Section A.3 for a formal analysis of the comparative statics.

22



1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Period

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

0.3

(a) Labor Prod. Growth

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Period

0

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

0.1

0.12

(b) Unemployment

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Period

0.5

0.55

0.6

0.65

0.7

0.75

(c) Labor Share

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Period

0.9

0.92

0.94

0.96

0.98

1

1.02

1.04

1.06

1.08

1.1

Base
W
WB
Y

(d) Relative Outcomes

Figure 3: This figures traces the impact of a change in bargaining institutions that decreases χ by 3.5%, which
nearly eliminates technology-driven unemployment. All results are presented relative to a baseline scenario without
a breakthrough. The economy starts on a balanced growth path.

not necessarily have a large impact on productivity growth on the transition path. Indeed, the

economy reverts to the BGP quickly after the change in bargaining institutions.

While bargaining institutions do not affect long-run productivity growth rates, they do alter

wages and incentives for R&D investment, as shown in equation (28). A reduction in χ, therefore,

induces changes in unemployment such that long-run R&D incentives are unchanged. Specifically,

a decrease in χ leads to a decrease in u∗, as shown in panel (b).

The fall in χ lowers the labor share of income. The fall in u∗ has the opposite effect. Panel

(c) demonstrates that the former effect is stronger for the calibrated model. Figures A.2 and A.5

present the robustness exercises. All results are qualitatively similar.

The inefficiencies in the model depend on labor market bargaining. Since there is surplus labor

and no opportunity cost to working, wages would be zero in a perfectly competitive labor market

with technology-driven unemployment. With zero wages, there would be no incentive to invest in

inefficient labor-saving technologies. Decreases in the exogenous component of worker bargaining

power lessen the degree of inefficiency, lowering unemployment and increasing output. As in the

previous section, panel (d) examines output, wages, and the wage bill. Since productivity and the

23



1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Period

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

0.3

(a) Labor Prod. Growth

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Period

0

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

0.1

0.12

(b) Unemployment

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Period

0.5

0.55

0.6

0.65

0.7

0.75

(c) Labor Share

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Period

0.9

0.95

1

1.05

1.1

1.15

1.2

1.25

1.3

Base
W
Y/N

(d) Relative Outcomes

Figure 4: This figures traces the impact of a decrease in population growth from 1.4%/year to .7%/year. All results
are presented relative to a baseline scenario without a breakthrough. The economy starts on a balanced growth path.

labor share both decrease, wages fall. Since output and the labor share move in opposite directions,

however, the impact on the wage bill is ambiguous. Panel (c) shows that the decline in the labor

share is small. As a result, the wage bill increases.

4.4 Population Growth

Finally, I examine the effect of changes in population growth on labor market outcomes. Unlike

technological breakthroughs or changes in labor market institutions, exogenous changes in the

population growth rate do not induce welfare-relevant trade-offs.26 Figure 4 presents the results.27

At all times, effective capital and effective labor grow at the same rate. A decrease in the labor

force growth rate, therefore, must lead to a reallocation of R&D inputs towards labor-saving (i.e.,

labor-augmenting) technology. This result is shown in panel (a). In a competitive equilibrium, this

also implies that the incentive for such R&D is higher. In other words, unemployment decreases,

26Of course, this abstracts from the reason for a change in the population growth rate, which may itself have
welfare consequences.

27Appendix Section A.3 presents a formal analysis of the comparative statics.

24



as shown in panel (b). The decline in unemployment increases the labor share, as demonstrated

in panel (c). Panel (d) presents the results for wages and income per worker. Both productivity

and the labor share of income increase, implying that wages and income per person also increase.

Figures A.3 and A.6 present the results from the the alternate calibration outcomes, which are

qualitatively similar.

5 Conclusion

There is a vigorous public debate about the effects of labor-saving technical change on unemploy-

ment and other labor market outcomes, as well as the appropriate response of government policy.

These questions involves dynamic, general equilibrium outcomes. Growth theory should have much

to add. Most modern growth theory, however, relies on the assumption of an aggregate produc-

tion function with smooth ex post substitution between capital and labor. While convenient for

many applications, this unrealistic assumption precludes the possibility that labor-saving technical

change can cause structural unemployment via the saturation of labor demand. This limits the

ability of economic theory to contribute to the public debate.

In this paper, I examine the long-run relationship between technological change and unemploy-

ment. To allow for a direct relationship between technology and unemployment, I consider the

role of putty-clay production. In this setting, it is possible that labor demand will be insufficient

to generate full employment at any positive wage. Economists have long considered models of

putty-clay production to be more realistic than aggregate production functions (e.g., Johansen,

1959; Samuelson, 1962; Akerlof and Stiglitz, 1969). I use the model to ask two primary questions.

First, I examine the forces that lead to a constant long-run rate of unemployment in the pres-

ence of labor-saving technical change. Together with labor market bargaining, endogenous and

directed research activity plays a pivotal role in this regard. Second, I examine the consequences

of a technological breakthrough that permanently reduces the cost of developing new labor-saving

technologies. Breakthroughs do not cause labor to become obsolete, but they do introduce welfare-

relevant trade-offs. In particular, they increase the long-run growth rate of wages and output, but

increase unemployment and lower the labor share of income. They also exacerbate inefficiencies,

leading to lower output in the short run.

I examine a simple, expository model in order to study the key mechanisms driving economic

outcomes. Future work can further this line of inquiry by developing more elaborate, quantitative

models to determine the precise consequences of policy intervention. One fruitful direction would

be to combine the model developed here, which focuses on factor-augmenting technical change,

with the task-based approach of Acemoglu and Autor (2011) and Acemoglu and Restrepo (2016).

The hybrid model would be a natural environment in which to study the effects of labor-saving

technology on workers with different types of skills and education (Hémous and Olsen, 2016). It

would also be interesting to broaden the forces generating unemployment. I consider a very simple

representation of labor market bargaining in order to focus on the role of technology. This is

25



the opposite of most research on unemployment, which examines search frictions, but abstracts

from labor-saving technical change (Pissarides, 2000; Rogerson et al., 2005). Finally, future work

could shed further light on the long-run relationship between technical change and unemployment

by considering endogenous human capital accumulation that allows workers to become scientists

capable of inventing new technologies.

26



References

Acemoglu, D. (1998): “Why do new technologies complement skills? Directed technical change
and wage inequality,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1055–1089.

Acemoglu, D. (2001): “Good jobs versus bad jobs,” Journal of labor Economics, 19, 1–21.

Acemoglu, D. (2002): “Directed technical change,” Review of Economic Studies, 69, 781–809.

Acemoglu, D. (2003): “Labor-and capital-augmenting technical change,” Journal of the European
Economic Association, 1, 1–37.

Acemoglu, D. (2010): “When does labor scarcity encourage innovation?” Journal of Political
Economy, 118, 1037–1078.

Acemoglu, D., P. Aghion, L. Bursztyn, and D. Hemous (2012): “The environment and
directed technical change,” American Economic Review, 102, 131–66.

Acemoglu, D. and D. Autor (2011): “Skills, tasks and technologies: Implications for employ-
ment and earnings,” Handbook of Labor Economics, 4, 1043–1171.

Acemoglu, D. and P. Restrepo (2016): “The race between machine and man: Implications of
technology for growth, factor shares and employment,” NBER Working Paper.

Acemoglu, D. and P. Restrepo (2017a): “Robots and jobs: Evidence from US labor markets,”
NBER Working Paper.

Acemoglu, D. and P. Restrepo (2017b): “Secular stagnation? The effect of aging on economic
growth in the age of automation,” NBER Working Paper.

Acemoglu, D. and R. Shimer (1999): “Holdups and efficiency with search frictions,” Interna-
tional Economic Review, 40, 827–849.

Aghion, P. and P. Howitt (1992): “A model of growth through creative destruction,” Econo-
metrica, 323–351.

Aghion, P. and P. Howitt (1994): “Growth and unemployment,” Review of Economic Studies,
61, 477–494.

Akerlof, G. A. and J. E. Stiglitz (1969): “Capital, wages and structural unemployment,”
Economic Journal, 79, 269–281.

Akst, D. (2013): “Automation anxiety,” The Wilson Quarterly.

Autor, D. (2014): Polanyi’s paradox and the shape of employment growth, National Bureau of
Economic Research Cambridge, MA.

Autor, D. (2015): “Why are there still so many jobs? The history and future of workplace
automation,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 29, 3–30.

27



Autor, D. and D. Dorn (2013): “The growth of low-skill service jobs and the polarization of
the US labor market,” American Economic Review, 103, 1553–1597.

Benzell, S. G., L. J. Kotlikoff, G. LaGarda, and J. D. Sachs (2015): “Robots are us:
Some economics of human replacement,” NBER Working Paper.

Bloom, N., C. I. Jones, J. Van Reenen, and M. Webb (2016): “Are ideas getting harder to
find?” Unpublished paper, Stanford University.

Brynjolfsson, E. and A. McAfee (2012): Race against the machine: How the digital revolution
is accelerating innovation, driving productivity, and irreversibly transforming employment and the
economy, Brynjolfsson and McAfee.

Brynjolfsson, E. and A. McAfee (2014): The second machine age: Work, progress, and
prosperity in a time of brilliant technologies, WW Norton & Company.

Calvo, G. A. (1976): “Optimal Growth in a Putty-Clay Model,” Econometrica, 867–878.

Caselli, F. and W. J. Coleman (2006): “The world technology frontier,” American Economic
Review, 96, 499–522.

Casey, G. (2017): “Energy Efficiency and Directed Technical Change: Implications for Climate
Change Mitigation,” Working Paper.

Casey, G. and R. Horii (2017): “The Uzawa theorem and fixed factors of production,” Working
Paper.

Cass, D. and J. E. Stiglitz (1969): “The implications of alternative saving and expectations
hypotheses for choices of technique and patterns of growth,” Journal of Political Economy, 586–
627.

Cummins, J. G. and G. L. Violante (2002): “Investment-specific technical change in the United
States (1947–2000): Measurement and macroeconomic consequences,” Review of Economic dy-
namics, 5, 243–284.

Dinopoulos, E. and P. Thompson (1998): “Schumpeterian growth without scale effects,” Jour-
nal of Economic Growth, 3, 313–335.

Domar, E. D. (1946): “Capital expansion, rate of growth, and employment,” Econometrica,
137–147.

Golosov, M., J. Hassler, P. Krusell, and A. Tsyvinski (2014): “Optimal taxes on fossil
fuel in general equilibrium,” Econometrica, 82, 41–88.

Graetz, G. and G. Michaels (2017): “Robots at work,” Working Paper.

Greenwood, J., Z. Hercowitz, and P. Krusell (1997): “Long-run implications of investment-
specific technological change,” American Economic Review, 342–362.

Grossman, G. M., E. Helpman, E. Oberfield, and T. Sampson (2017): “Balanced Growth
Despite Uzawa,” American Economic Review.

28



Harrod, R. (1948): Towards a dynamic economics, Macmillan.

Hassler, J., P. Krusell, and C. Olovsson (2012): “Energy-saving technical change,” NBER
Working Paper No. 18456.

Hassler, J., P. Krusell, and C. Olovsson (2016): “Directed technical change as a response
to natural-resource scarcity,” Working Paper.

Hémous, D. and M. Olsen (2016): “The Rise of the Machines: Automation, Horizontal Innova-
tion and Income Inequality,” Working Paper.

Howitt, P. (1999): “Steady endogenous growth with population and R. & D. inputs growing,”
Journal of Political Economy, 107, 715–730.

Johansen, L. (1959): “Substitution versus fixed production coefficients in the theory of economic
growth: A synthesis,” Econometrica, 157–176.

Jones, C. I. (1995a): “R & D-based models of economic growth,” Journal of political Economy,
103, 759–784.

Jones, C. I. (1995b): “Time series tests of endogenous growth models,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 110, 495–525.

Jones, C. I. (2002): “Sources of US economic growth in a world of ideas,” American Economic
Review, 92, 220–239.

Jones, C. I. (2005): “The shape of production functions and the direction of technical change,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120, 517–549.

Jones, C. I. (2016): “The facts of economic growth,” Handbook of Macroeconomics, 2, 3–69.

Jones, C. I. and D. Scrimgeour (2008): “A new proof of Uzawa’s steady-state growth theorem,”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 90, 180–182.

Kennedy, C. (1964): “Induced bias in innovation and the theory of distribution,” Economic
Journal, 74, 541–547.

Keynes, J. M. (1930): “Economic possibilities for our grandchildren,” in Essays in Persuasion,
Springer, 321–332.

Kortum, S. S. (1997): “Research, patenting, and technological change,” Econometrica, 1389–1419.

Krusell, P., L. E. Ohanian, J.-V. Ŕıos-Rull, and G. L. Violante (2000): “Capital-skill
complementarity and inequality: A macroeconomic analysis,” Econometrica, 68, 1029–1053.

Michaels, G., A. Natraj, and J. Van Reenen (2014): “Has ICT polarized skill demand?
Evidence from eleven countries over twenty-five years,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 96,
60–77.

Mortensen, D. T. (2005): “Growth, unemployment, and labor market policy,” Journal of the
European Economic Association, 3, 236–258.

29



Peretto, P. F. (1998): “Technological change and population growth,” Journal of Economic
Growth, 3, 283–311.

Peretto, P. F. and J. J. Seater (2013): “Factor-eliminating technical change,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 60, 459–473.

Pissarides, C. A. (2000): Equilibrium unemployment theory, MIT press.

Rogerson, R., R. Shimer, and R. Wright (2005): “Search-theoretic models of the labor
market: A survey,” Journal of Economic Literature, 43, 959–988.

Romer, P. M. (1990): “Endogenous technological change,” Journal of political Economy, 98,
S71–S102.

Samuelson, P. A. (1962): “Parable and realism in capital theory: the surrogate production
function,” Review of Economic Studies, 29, 193–206.

Samuelson, P. A. (1965): “A theory of induced innovation along Kennedy-Weisäcker lines,”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 343–356.

Schlicht, E. (2006): “A variant of Uzawa’s theorem,” Economics Bulletin, 5, 1–5.

Seater, J. J. (2005): “Share-altering technical progress,” Focus on economic growth and produc-
tivity, 59–84.

Segerstrom, P. S. (1998): “Endogenous growth without scale effects,” American Economic
Review, 1290–1310.

Solow, R. M. (1956): “A contribution to the theory of economic growth,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 70, 65–94.

Solow, R. M. (1962): “Substitution and fixed proportions in the theory of capital,” Review of
Economic Studies, 29, 207–218.

Solow, R. M. (1994): “Perspectives on growth theory,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 8,
45–54.

Solow, R. M., J. Tobin, C. C. von Weizsäcker, and M. Yaari (1966): “Neoclassical growth
with fixed factor proportions,” Review of Economic Studies, 33, 79–115.

Stiglitz, J. E. (2014): “Unemployment and innovation,” NBER Working Paper.

Uzawa, H. (1961): “Neutral inventions and the stability of growth equilibrium,” Review of Eco-
nomic Studies, 28, 117–124.

Valentinyi, A. and B. Herrendorf (2008): “Measuring factor income shares at the sectoral
level,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 11, 820–835.

Zeira, J. (1998): “Workers, machines, and economic growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
113, 1091–1117.

30



Zuleta, H. (2008): “Factor saving innovations and factor income shares,” Review of Economic
Dynamics, 11, 836–851.

31



A Appendix

A.1 Derivations

A.1.1 Final Good Producer

Let LFG be the Lagrangian for the final good producer’s maximization problem. Since the final good
producer would never higher excess workers, it is immediate that AL,t(i)Lt(i) < Xt(i)

αM1−α ∀i.
Thus,

LFG =
∫ 1

0
AL,t(i)Lt(i)di−

∫ 1
0
wt(i)Lt(i)di−

∫ 1
0
pX,t(i)Xt(i)di− pM,tM

−
∫ 1

0
λt(i)

[
AL,t(i)Lt(i)−Xt(i)αM1−α

]
di. (A.1)

With δ = 1, there will never be unused capital. I focus on this case and ignore the complementary

slackness condition. The first order conditions are given by

AL,t(i) = wt(i) + λt(i)AL,t(i), (A.2)

pX,t(i) = αλt(i)Xt(i)
α−1M1−α, (A.3)

pM,t = (1− α)
∫ 1

0
λt(i)Xt(i)

αM−αdi. (A.4)

Rearranging (A.2) and plugging in to (A.3) and (A.4) yields

pX,t(i) = α[1−
wt(i)

AL,t(i)
]Xt(i)

α−1M1−α, (A.5)

pM,t = (1− α)
∫ 1

0
[1− wt(i)

AL,t(i)
]Xt(i)

αM−αdi. (A.6)

A.1.2 Capital Good Producers

Capital good producers choose prices, production quantities, and technological characteristics to

maximize profits, subject to inverse demand, research productivity, and investment price con-

straints. Let LCG be the Lagrangian for the capital good producer problem. Then,

LCG = pX,t(i)Xt(i)−
rt

AK,t(i)
Xt(i)−pR,t

(
RX,t(i)+RL,t(i)

)
−
∑

J=L,K

κJ [AJ,t(i)−
(
1+ηJRJ,t(i)

)
AJ,t−1]

− υt(i)
[
pX,t(i)− α[1− χ− χ

Γ(ut)AL,t
AL,t(i)

]Xt(i)
α−1M1−α

]
, (A.7)

32



which applies the fact that wt(i) = χAL,t(i) + χΓ(ut)AL,t. The first order conditions are

υt(i) = Xt(i), (A.8)

pX,t(i) =
rt

AK,t(i)
− υt(i)α(α− 1)[1− χ− χ

Γ(ut)AL,t
AL,t(i)

]AK,t(i)
αXt(i)

α−2M1−α, (A.9)

κK = rtAK,t(i)
−2Xt(i), (A.10)

κL = υt(i)αΓ(ut)AL,tAL,t(i)
−2Xt(i)

α−1M1−α, (A.11)

pR,t = κKηKAK,t−1, (A.12)

pR,t = κLηLAL,t−1. (A.13)

Plugging (A.8) into (A.9) and applying (A.5) yields,

pX,t(i) =
1

α

rt
AK,t(i)

, (A.14)

Xt(i) = α
2

1−αA
1

1−α
K,t r

−1
1−α
t [1− χ−

χΓ(ut)AL,t
AL,t(i)

]
1

1−αM. (A.15)

Putting these together yields

π̄X,t(i) = (1−
1

α
)α

2
1−αA

α
1−α
K,t r

−α
1−α
t [1− χ−

χΓ(ut)AL,t
AL,t(i)

]
1

1−αM, (A.16)

where π̄X,t(i) is profits before considering payments to R&D inputs.

Taking the ratio of (A.11) and (A.10) yields

κL
κK

=
αχΓ(ut)AL,tXt(i)

α−1M1−αAK,t(i)
rt

AK,t(i)
AL,t(i)2

(A.17)

Applying (A.8), (A.14), and (A.5) gives

κL
κK

=
χΓ(ut)AL,tAK,t(i)

αAL,t(i)2[1− χ− χ
Γ(ut)AL,t
AL,t(i)

]
. (A.18)

Similarly, taking the ratio of (A.13) and (A.12) yields

1 =
κLηLAL,t−1
κKηKAK,t−1

. (A.19)

Combining these expressions yields

1 =
χΓ(ut)AL,tAK,t(i)

α[1− χ− χΓ(ut)AL,tAL,t(i) ]AL,t(i)
2

ηLAL,t−1
ηKAK,t−1

, (A.20)

which is the research arbitrage equation given in the main text. This expression can also be derived

by maximizing (A.16) subject to law of motion for technology, equation (4).

33



A.1.3 Research Allocations

In this section, I derive the equilibrium research allocations. It is immediate from equation (A.20)

that all capital good producers make identical decisions, which implies that AJ,t(i) = AJ,t ∀i, t, J .
Since there is a unit mass of research inputs, this also implies that RJ,t(i) = RJ,t ∀i, t, J . Applying
these results to (A.20) and rearranging yields

Γ̃(ut)
AL,t
AL,t−1

=
AK,t
AK,t−1

ηL
ηK

, (A.21)

where Γ̃(ut) =
α
(

1−χ−χΓ(ut)
)

χΓ(ut)
. Applying (4) and (5) yields

Γ̃(ut)
(
1 + ηLRL,t

)
=
(
1 + ηK(1−RL,t)

) ηL
ηK

. (A.22)

Rearranging yields

ηLRL,t =
1

1 + Γ̃(ut)

(
ηL
ηK

+ ηL − Γ̃(ut)
)
, (A.23)

and noting that ηLRL,t = gL,t gives (24) in the main text.

A.2 Factor Shares

Throughout this section, I take advantage of the fact that all capital good producers make identical

decisions. As described in the main text

wtLt
Yt

=
wt
A,t

= χ+ χΓ(ut). (A.24)

Using equations (2) and (A.14), rtKt = αAK,tpX,tKt = α
2[1− χ− χΓ(ut)AL,tAL,t(i) ]

(
AK,tKt

)α
M1−α. So,

rtKt
Yt

= α2[1− χ− χ
Γ(ut)AL,t
AL,t(i)

]. (A.25)

Similarly, equation (A.6) implies

pM,tMt
Yt

= (1− α)[1− χ− χ
Γ(ut)AL,t
AL,t(i)

]. (A.26)

Next, I solve for the rental rate paid to R&D inputs. Combining equations (A.8), (A.10), and

(A.12) with market clearing condition (2) gives

pR,t = α
2[1− χ− χΓ(ut)]

(
AK,tKt

)α
M1−αηK

1

(1 + gX,t)
. (A.27)

34



Noting that there is a unit mass of R&D inputs, this yields

pR,t
Yt

= α2[1− χ− χΓ(ut)]ηK
1

(1 + gX,t)
. (A.28)

The remainder of output is paid to capital good producers as profits.

A.3 Comparative Statics

In this section, I proof the results presented in Section 3.5.2. I also investigate the comparative

statics for changes in χ and n. These results inform the analysis presented in Sections 4.3 and 4.4.

I start by considering the determinants of the growth rate of labor productivity, g∗L. Using

equation (27), I define

G(g∗L, ηL, ηK , n, χ) ≡ (1 + ηK −
ηK
ηL
g∗L)

α
1−α − (1 + n)(1 + g∗L) = 0. (A.29)

By the implicit function theorem,

∂g∗L
∂n

=
−Gn
Gg∗L

=
(1 + g∗L)

−ψ ηKηL − (1 + n)
< 0, (A.30)

where ψ = α1−α(1 + ηK −
ηK
ηL
g∗L)

2α−1
1−α . Assumption (A1) implies that ψ > 0. Moreover, since all of

the arguments of G, other than g∗L, are exogenous parameters,
∂g∗L
∂n =

dg∗L
dn . This will be true for all

subsequent analyses as well.

Similarly,

dg∗L
dχ

=
−Gχ
Gg∗L

=
0

−ψ ηKηL − (1 + n)
= 0, (A.31)

and

dg∗L
dηL

=
−GηL
Gg∗L

=
−ψηKg∗Lη

−2
L

−ψ ηKηL − (1 + n)
(A.32)

=
ψηKg

∗
L

ψηKηL + (1 + n)η2L
∈ (0, 1). (A.33)

The upper bound follows from the fact that g∗L ≤ ηL. The inequality is strict when research
allocations are interior, which is guaranteed by Assumption (A1).

Next, I investigate the determinants of the steady state rate of unemployment, u∗. I use equation

(28) to define

H
(
u∗, ηL, ηK , n, χ

)
≡ g∗L(ηL, ηK , n, χ)−

1

1 + Γ̃(u∗, χ)

(
ηL
ηK

+ ηL − Γ̃(u∗, χ)
)

= 0, (A.34)

35



where Γ̃(u∗, χ) =
α
(

1−χ−χΓ(u∗t )
)

χΓ(u∗t )
. The function g∗L(ηL, ηK , n, χ) is implicitly defined above. It is

helpful to note that HΓ̃(u∗) > 0 and Γ̃u∗ > 0. Thus, Hu∗ > 0. Moreover, Γ̃χ < 0, implying that

Hχ < 0. By the implicit function theorem,

du∗

dn
=
−Hn
Hu∗

=

−dg∗L
dn

Hu∗
> 0, (A.35)

and

du∗

dχ
=
−Hχ
Hu∗

> 0. (A.36)

Also,

du∗

dηL
=
−HηL
Hu∗

=

−dg∗L
dηL
−
(
1 + 1ηK

)
1

1+Γ̃(u∗,χ)

Hu∗
. (A.37)

As a result,

du∗

dηL
> 0 ⇐⇒ (A.38)

dg∗L
dηL

<
(
1 +

1

ηK

) 1
1 + Γ̃(u∗, χ)

, (A.39)

where
dg∗L
dηL

< 1, as shown in the previous section.

Finally, I examine the determinants of the labor share of income. I define

I(κ∗L, ηL, ηK , n, χ) ≡ κ∗L − χ− χΓ(u∗) = 0. (A.40)

By the implicit function theorem,

dκ∗L
dηL

=
−IηL
Iκ∗L

=
−χΓ′(u∗) du∗dηL

1
. (A.41)

Since Γ′(u∗) < 0,
dκ∗L
dηL

> 0 ⇐⇒ du∗dηL > 0. Similarly,

dκ∗L
dn

=
−In
Iκ∗L

=
−χΓ′(u∗)du∗dn

1
< 0 (A.42)

and

dκ∗L
dχ

=
−In
Iκ∗L

=
−(1 + Γ′(u∗)du∗dχ )

1
. (A.43)

Noting that Γ′(u∗)du
∗

dχ ) < 0,
dκ∗L
dχ > 0 ⇐⇒

∣∣Γ′(u∗)du∗dχ ∣∣ > 1.
36



A.4 Microfounded Wage Determination

As explained in the main text, the expression for wages given in equation (9) captures the main

features of wage determination in a search and matching model of bargaining. At the same time,

it is also convenient for the modeling of endogenous and directed technical change. In this section,

I present a very simple model of bargaining that yields the expression for wages given in the text.

Rather than providing a comprehensive and realistic model of the markets, the purpose of this

exercise is to show that the main equation is indeed capturing the major forces behind bargaining

models.

For simplicity, I consider a matching and bargaining model in which all vacancies are filled

instantaneously. I divide each period into two sub-period of equal duration. Between the two sub-

periods, there is a shock that separates a fraction λ of workers form their jobs. At the beginning

of the period, a continuum of size Lt =
AK,t
AL,t

Kαt M
1−α atomistic workers are each matched to a

random job opening. They engage in Nash bargaining with the representative firm via a risk-neutral

intermediary (e.g., a labor union). Then, between the two sub-periods, that shock occurs and a

continuum λLt of these jobs become vacant. Once again, the jobs are instantaneously matched to

workers. The pool of workers includes those recently separated from their first sub-period jobs, a

continuum of size λLt, and those who were unemployed in the first sub-period, a continuum of size

Nt − Lt. Again, wages are determined via Nash bargaining. All agents have perfect information
and foresight when bargaining. Neither workers nor the firm can break contracts once they have

been set.

A.4.1 Second sub-period bargaining

To start, I consider the bargaining process that occurs when workers meet firms at the beginning

of the second sub-period. As noted in the main text, the firm rents capital before bargaining with

workers. The rental costs, therefore, are sunk and not relevant to the bargaining surplus. All agents

take the outcome of second sub-period bargaining as given at the beginning of the first sub-period.

There is no dis-utility from working and the worker bargains through a risk neutral intermediary.

So, the worker gets payoff 12wt,2(i) if they reach an agreement and 0 otherwise. Here, wt,2(i) is the

wage that is proposed – and eventually paid – in the second period. Similarly, the payoff to the

firm is 12
(
AL(i)− wt,2(i)

)
if they reach an agreement and 0 otherwise.

Nash bargaining maximizes the surplus. As usual, therefore, the negotiated wage is given by

wt,2(i) = argmax

{
β ln

[
AL(i)− wt,2(i)

]
+ (1− β) ln

[
wt,2(i)

]}
, (A.44)

where β is the bargaining power of the firm. This yields

wt,2(i) = (1− β)AL,t(i). (A.45)

37



All workers and firms make this deal, implying that no job is left unfilled. Both workers and the

representative firm take this outcome as given when they consider undertake bargaining at the

beginning of the first period. Since workers do not know the job to which they will be matched

in the second sub-period, they will take into account the average wage, w2,t = (1 − β)AL,t, when
bargaining, where AL,t =

∫ 1
0 AL,t(i)di as in the main text.

At the beginning of the second sub-period, there are two groups of workers looking for jobs:

those who were unemployed during the first sub-period and those that experience the job separation

shock. Each worker has an equal probability of being matched to a job at the beginning of the

second sub-period. The probability that a searching worker finds a match, therefore, is given by

# of openings

# of searching workers
=

λLt
(λ− 1)Lt +Nt

(A.46)

=

[
λ− 1
λ

+
1

λ

1

1− ut

]−1
(A.47)

=

[
λ(1− ut)

1− (1− λ)(1− ut)

]
(A.48)

≡ Γ̂(ut), (A.49)

where ut = 1− LtNt . It is helpful to note that Γ̂(ut) ∈ (0, 1) and Γ̂
′(ut) < 0.

A.4.2 First sub-period bargaining

Now, I consider the bargaining that occurs at the beginning of the first sub-period. Noting that

there is no down time and a job is filled with certainty in the second sub-period, the payoff to

the representative firm if it reaches a first sub-period deal is 12(2− λ)
[
AL,t(i)−wt,2

]
+ λ12βAL,t(i).

The firm’s payoff if a deal is not reached is 12βAL,t(i). Thus, the surplus from reaching a deal is

1
2

[(
(2− λ) + β(λ− 1)

)
AL,t(i)− (2− λ)w1,t(i)

]
.

Meanwhile, the payoff to the worker of reaching a deal is (1− λ12)wt,1(i) + λ
1
2 Γ̂(ut)(1− β)AL,t.

The payoff if a deal is not reach is 12 Γ̂(u)AL,t. Thus, the surplus from reaching a deal in the first

sub-period is 12

[
(2− λ)wt,1(i) + (λ− 1)Γ̂(ut)AL,t

]
.

Now, Nash bargaining in the first sub-period yields

w1,t(i) = argmax

{
β ln

[(
(2− λ) + β(λ− 1)

)
AL,t(i)− (2− λ)w1,t(i)

]
+ (1− β) ln

[
(2− λ)wt,1(i) + (λ− 1)Γ̂(ut)AL,t

]}
, (A.50)

which yields

wt,1(i) =
(1− β)
2− λ

[
(2− λ) + β(λ− 1)

]
AL,t(i) +

β(1− λ)
2− λ

Γ̂(ut)AL,t. (A.51)

38



A.4.3 Average wages

When firms demand capital, they care about the associated expected wage bill. Similarly, the labor

share of income is determined by total wages. In both cases, the relevant wage is given by

wt(i) = (1 +
λ

2
)wt,1(i) +

λ

2
wt,2(i). (A.52)

Substituting (A.45) and (A.51) into (A.52) yields

wt(i) =
1

2
(1− β)

[
2− β(1− λ)

]
AL,t(i) +

1

2
β(1− λ)Γ̂(ut)AL,t, (A.53)

an expression with the same form as equation (9). In particular, we can define χ = 12(1 − β)
[
2 −

β(1 − λ)
]

and Γ(ut) =
β(1−λ)

(1−β)
[
2−β(1−λ)

] Γ̂(ut). The central goal of this paper is to evaluate the
qualitative behavior of the dynamical system. Thus, I use the alternate formulation from equation

(??) for the quantitative analysis and comparative statics, because this yields simpler and more

intuitive expressions.

A.5 Calibration Data

Income Share of Labor. Definition: Payments to labor as a share of GDP. Value in model: κ∗L.

Value in data: 67%. Source: Table 2 of Valentinyi and Herrendorf (2008).

Income Share of Land. Definition: Payments to land as a share of GDP. Value in model: κ∗M .

Value in data: 5%. Source: Table 2 of Valentinyi and Herrendorf (2008).

Unemployment Rate. Definition: Fraction of labor force not employed. Value in model: u∗.

Value in data: 5.8%, annual average of civilian unemployment rate, 1948 – 2016. Source: Bureau

of Labor Statistics (BLS) via FRED database.

Labor Productivity Growth. Definition: Growth rate of output per worker. Value in model:

g∗L. Value in data: 2.2%/year, geometric average of growth in real output per person in the nonfarm

business sector, 1948 – 2016. Source: BLS via FRED.

Labor Force Growth. Definition: Growth rate of the labor force. Value in model: n. Value in

data: 1.4%/year, geometric average of growth in civilian labor force, 1948 – 2016. Source: BLS via

FRED.

39



A.6 Figures for Robustness Exercises

A.6.1 High ηL

This section presents the results when assuming that ηKηL = 0.5. The qualitative results are the

same as the baseline case. Figure A.2 shows the impact of a 2.5% decrease in χ.

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Period

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

0.3

(a) Labor Prod. Growth

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Period

0

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

0.1

0.12

(b) Unemployment

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Period

0.5

0.55

0.6

0.65

0.7

0.75

(c) Labor Share

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Period

0.96

0.98

1

1.02

1.04

1.06

1.08

1.1

1.12

Baseline
Wages
Wage Bill
Output

(d) Output and Wages

Figure A.1: This figures traces the impact of a technological breakthrough that decreases ηL by 10%. All results
are presented relative to a baseline scenario without a breakthrough. The economy starts on a balanced growth path.

40



1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Period

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

0.3

(a) Labor Prod. Growth

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Period

0

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

0.1

0.12

(b) Unemployment

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Period

0.5

0.55

0.6

0.65

0.7

0.75

(c) Labor Share

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Period

0.9

0.92

0.94

0.96

0.98

1

1.02

1.04

1.06

1.08

1.1

Base
W
WB
Y

(d) Relative Outcomes

Figure A.2: This figures traces the impact of a change in bargaining institutions that decreases χ by 2.5%, which
nearly eliminates technology-driven unemployment. All results are presented relative to a baseline scenario without
a breakthrough. The economy starts on a balanced growth path.

41



1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Period

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

0.3

(a) Labor Prod. Growth

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Period

0

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

0.1

0.12

(b) Unemployment

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Period

0.5

0.55

0.6

0.65

0.7

0.75

(c) Labor Share

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Period

0.9

0.95

1

1.05

1.1

1.15

1.2

1.25

1.3

Base
W
Y/N

(d) Relative Outcomes

Figure A.3: This figures traces the impact of a decrease in population growth from 1.4%/year to .7%/year. All
results are presented relative to a baseline scenario without a breakthrough. The economy starts on a balanced
growth path.

42



A.6.2 Low ηL

This section presents the results when assuming that ηKηL = 2. The qualitative results are the same

as the baseline case. Figure A.2 shows the impact of a 4.2% decrease in χ.

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Period

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

0.3

(a) Labor Prod. Growth

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Period

0

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

0.1

0.12

(b) Unemployment

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Period

0.5

0.55

0.6

0.65

0.7

0.75

(c) Labor Share

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Period

0.96

0.98

1

1.02

1.04

1.06

1.08

1.1

1.12

1.14

Baseline
Wages
Wage Bill
Output

(d) Output and Wages

Figure A.4: This figures traces the impact of a technological breakthrough that decreases ηL by 10%. All results
are presented relative to a baseline scenario without a breakthrough. The economy starts on a balanced growth path.

43



1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Period

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

0.3

(a) Labor Prod. Growth

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Period

0

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

0.1

0.12

(b) Unemployment

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Period

0.5

0.55

0.6

0.65

0.7

0.75

(c) Labor Share

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Period

0.9

0.92

0.94

0.96

0.98

1

1.02

1.04

1.06

1.08

1.1

Base
W
WB
Y

(d) Relative Outcomes

Figure A.5: This figures traces the impact of a change in bargaining institutions that decreases χ by 4%, which
nearly eliminates technology-driven unemployment. All results are presented relative to a baseline scenario without
a breakthrough. The economy starts on a balanced growth path.

44



1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Period

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

0.3

(a) Labor Prod. Growth

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Period

0

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

0.1

0.12

(b) Unemployment

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Period

0.5

0.55

0.6

0.65

0.7

0.75

(c) Labor Share

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Period

0.9

0.95

1

1.05

1.1

1.15

1.2

1.25

1.3

Base
W
Y/N

(d) Relative Outcomes

Figure A.6: This figures traces the impact of a decrease in population growth from 1.4%/year to .7%/year. All
results are presented relative to a baseline scenario without a breakthrough. The economy starts on a balanced
growth path.

45


	Introduction
	Relation to Existing Literature
	Model
	Environment
	Production
	Research and Development
	Individuals
	Wage Determination

	Optimization
	Substitution between Capital and Labor
	Dynamics
	Balanced Growth Path
	Characterization
	Comparative Statics

	Efficiency and the Transition Path

	Simulation
	Calibration
	Technological Breakthrough
	Bargaining Institutions
	Population Growth

	Conclusion
	Appendix
	Derivations
	Final Good Producer
	Capital Good Producers
	Research Allocations

	Factor Shares
	Comparative Statics
	Microfounded Wage Determination
	Second sub-period bargaining
	First sub-period bargaining
	Average wages

	Calibration Data
	Figures for Robustness Exercises
	High L
	Low L



