




































/Users/michaelosborne/Documents/Research/future_of_employment_paper/original/.texpadtmp/future_of_employment_original.dvi


working paper

The Future of Employment
Carl Benedikt Frey & Michael Osborne

Published by the Oxford Martin Programme
on Technology and Employment



THE FUTURE OF EMPLOYMENT: HOW
SUSCEPTIBLE ARE JOBS TO

COMPUTERISATION?
∗

Carl Benedikt Frey† and Michael A. Osborne‡

September 17, 2013

.

Abstract

We examine how susceptible jobs are to computerisation. To as-
sess this, we begin by implementing a novel methodology to estimate
the probability of computerisation for 702 detailed occupations, us-
ing a Gaussian process classifier. Based on these estimates, we ex-
amine expected impacts of future computerisation on us labour mar-
ket outcomes, with the primary objective of analysing the number of
jobs at risk and the relationship between an occupation’s probability
of computerisation, wages and educational attainment. According
to our estimates, about 47 percent of total us employment is at risk.
We further provide evidence that wages and educational attainment
exhibit a strong negative relationship with an occupation’s proba-
bility of computerisation.

∗We thank the Oxford University Engineering Sciences Department and the Oxford
Martin Programme on the Impacts of Future Technology for hosting the “Machines and
Employment” Workshop. We are indebted to Stuart Armstrong, Nick Bostrom, Eris
Chinellato, Mark Cummins, Daniel Dewey, David Dorn, Alex Flint, Claudia Goldin,
John Muellbauer, Vincent Mueller, Paul Newman, Seán Ó hÉigeartaigh, Anders Sand-
berg, Murray Shanahan, and Keith Woolcock for their excellent suggestions.

†Oxford Martin School, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX1 1PT, United Kingdom,
carl.frey@oxfordmartin.ox.ac.uk.

‡Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX1 3PJ, United
Kingdom, mosb@robots.ox.ac.uk.

1



Keywords: Occupational Choice, Technological Change, Wage In-

equality, Employment, Skill Demand

jel Classification: E24, J24, J31, J62, O33.

2



1 Introduction

In this paper, we address the question: how susceptible are jobs to com-
puterisation? Doing so, we build on the existing literature in two ways. 
First, drawing upon recent advances in Machine Learning (ml) and Mobile 
Robotics (mr), we develop a novel methodology to categorise occupations 
according to their susceptibility to computerisation.1 Second, we imple-
ment this methodology to estimate the probability of computerisation for 
702 detailed occupations, and examine expected impacts of future com-
puterisation on us labour market outcomes.

Our paper is motivated by John Maynard Keynes’s frequently cited pre-
diction of widespread technological unemployment “due to our discovery of 
means of economising the use of labour outrunning the pace at which we 
can find new uses for labour” (Keynes, 1933, p. 3). Indeed, over the past 
decades, computers have substituted for a number of jobs, including the 
functions of bookkeepers, cashiers and telephone operators (Bresnahan, 
1999; MGI, 2013). More recently, the poor performance of labour markets 
across advanced economies has intensified the debate about technological 
unemployment among economists. While there is ongoing disagreement 
about the driving forces behind the persistently high unemployment rates, 
a number of scholars have pointed at computer-controlled equipment as a 
possible explanation for recent jobless growth (see, for example, Brynjolf-
sson and McAfee, 2011).2

The impact of computerisation on labour market outcomes is well-
established in the literature, documenting the decline of employment in 
routine intensive occupations – i.e. occupations mainly consisting of tasks 
following well-defined procedures that can easily be performed by sophis-
ticated algorithms. For example, studies by Charles, et al. (2013) and 
Jaimovich and Siu (2012) emphasise that the ongoing decline in manufac-
turing employment and the disappearance of other routine jobs is causing

1We refer to computerisation as job automation by means of computer-controlled
equipment.

2This view finds support in a recent survey by the McKinsey Global Institute (mgi),
showing that 44 percent of firms which reduced their headcount since the financial crisis
of 2008 had done so by means of automation (MGI, 2011).

3



the current low rates of employment.3 In addition to the computerisation

of routine manufacturing tasks, Autor and Dorn (2013) document a struc-

tural shift in the labour market, with workers reallocating their labour

supply from middle-income manufacturing to low-income service occupa-

tions. Arguably, this is because the manual tasks of service occupations are

less susceptible to computerisation, as they require a higher degree of flex-

ibility and physical adaptability (Autor, et al., 2003; Goos and Manning,

2007; Autor and Dorn, 2013).

At the same time, with falling prices of computing, problem-solving

skills are becoming relatively productive, explaining the substantial em-

ployment growth in occupations involving cognitive tasks where skilled

labour has a comparative advantage, as well as the persistent increase

in returns to education (Katz and Murphy, 1992; Acemoglu, 2002; Autor

and Dorn, 2013). The title “Lousy and Lovely Jobs”, of recent work by

Goos and Manning (2007), thus captures the essence of the current trend

towards labour market polarization, with growing employment in high-

income cognitive jobs and low-income manual occupations, accompanied

by a hollowing-out of middle-income routine jobs.

According to Brynjolfsson and McAfee (2011), the pace of technological

innovation is still increasing, with more sophisticated software technologies

disrupting labour markets by making workers redundant. What is strik-

ing about the examples in their book is that computerisation is no longer

confined to routine manufacturing tasks. The autonomous driverless cars,

developed by Google, provide one example of how manual tasks in trans-

port and logistics may soon be automated. In the section “In Domain

After Domain, Computers Race Ahead”, they emphasise how fast moving

these developments have been. Less than ten years ago, in the chapter

“Why People Still Matter”, Levy and Murnane (2004) pointed at the diffi-

culties of replicating human perception, asserting that driving in traffic is

insusceptible to automation: “But executing a left turn against oncoming

traffic involves so many factors that it is hard to imagine discovering the

set of rules that can replicate a driver’s behaviour [. . . ]”. Six years later,

3Because the core job tasks of manufacturing occupations follow well-defined repet-
itive procedures, they can easily be codified in computer software and thus performed
by computers (Acemoglu and Autor, 2011).

4



in October 2010, Google announced that it had modified several Toyota

Priuses to be fully autonomous (Brynjolfsson and McAfee, 2011).

To our knowledge, no study has yet quantified what recent technolog-

ical progress is likely to mean for the future of employment. The present

study intends to bridge this gap in the literature. Although there are in-

deed existing useful frameworks for examining the impact of computers

on the occupational employment composition, they seem inadequate in

explaining the impact of technological trends going beyond the computeri-

sation of routine tasks. Seminal work by Autor, et al. (2003), for example,

distinguishes between cognitive and manual tasks on the one hand, and

routine and non-routine tasks on the other. While the computer substi-

tution for both cognitive and manual routine tasks is evident, non-routine

tasks involve everything from legal writing, truck driving and medical di-

agnoses, to persuading and selling. In the present study, we will argue that

legal writing and truck driving will soon be automated, while persuading,

for instance, will not. Drawing upon recent developments in Engineering

Sciences, and in particular advances in the fields of ml, including Data

Mining, Machine Vision, Computational Statistics and other sub-fields of

Artificial Intelligence, as well as mr, we derive additional dimensions re-

quired to understand the susceptibility of jobs to computerisation. Need-

less to say, a number of factors are driving decisions to automate and we

cannot capture these in full. Rather we aim, from a technological capabil-

ities point of view, to determine which problems engineers need to solve

for specific occupations to be automated. By highlighting these problems,

their difficulty and to which occupations they relate, we categorise jobs

according to their susceptibility to computerisation. The characteristics

of these problems were matched to different occupational characteristics,

using o∗net data, allowing us to examine the future direction of tech-
nological change in terms of its impact on the occupational composition

of the labour market, but also the number of jobs at risk should these

technologies materialise.

The present study relates to two literatures. First, our analysis builds

on the labour economics literature on the task content of employment (Au-

tor, et al., 2003; Goos and Manning, 2007; Autor and Dorn, 2013). Based

on defined premises about what computers do, this literature examines the

5



historical impact of computerisation on the occupational composition of

the labour market. However, the scope of what computers do has recently

expanded, and will inevitably continue to do so (Brynjolfsson and McAfee,

2011; MGI, 2013). Drawing upon recent progress in ml, we expand the

premises about the tasks computers are and will be suited to accomplish.

Doing so, we build on the task content literature in a forward-looking

manner. Furthermore, whereas this literature has largely focused on task

measures from the Dictionary of Occupational Titles (dot), last revised in

1991, we rely on the 2010 version of the dot successor o∗net – an online
service developed for the us Department of Labor.4 Accordingly, o∗net
has the advantage of providing more recent information on occupational

work activities.

Second, our study relates to the literature examining the offshoring

of information-based tasks to foreign worksites (Jensen and Kletzer, 2005;

Blinder, 2009; Jensen and Kletzer, 2010; Oldenski, 2012; Blinder and Krueger,

2013). This literature consists of different methodologies to rank and cat-

egorise occupations according to their susceptibility to offshoring. For

example, using o∗net data on the nature of work done in different occu-
pations, Blinder (2009) estimates that 22 to 29 percent of us jobs are or

will be offshorable in the next decade or two. These estimates are based

on two defining characteristics of jobs that cannot be offshored: (a) the

job must be performed at a specific work location; and (b) the job requires

face-to-face personal communication. Naturally, the characteristics of oc-

cupations that can be offshored are different from the characteristics of

occupations that can be automated. For example, the work of cashiers,

which has largely been substituted by self- service technology, must be

performed at specific work location and requires face-to-face contact. The

extent of computerisation is therefore likely to go beyond that of offshoring.

Hence, while the implementation of our methodology is similar to that of

Blinder (2009), we rely on different occupational characteristics.

The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we

review the literature on the historical relationship between technological

progress and employment. Section 3 describes recent and expected future

4An exception is Goos, et al. (2009).

6



technological developments. In Section 4, we describe our methodology, 
and in Section 5, we examine the expected impact of these technological 
developments on labour market outcomes. Finally, in Section 6, we derive 
some conclusions.

2 A history of technological revolutions and
employment

The concern over technological unemployment is hardly a recent phe-

nomenon. Throughout history, the process of creative destruction, fol-

lowing technological inventions, has created enormous wealth, but also

undesired disruptions. As stressed by Schumpeter (1962), it was not the

lack of inventive ideas that set the boundaries for economic development,

but rather powerful social and economic interests promoting the techno-

logical status quo. This is nicely illustrated by the example of William

Lee, inventing the stocking frame knitting machine in 1589, hoping that it

would relieve workers of hand-knitting. Seeking patent protection for his

invention, he travelled to London where he had rented a building for his

machine to be viewed by Queen Elizabeth I. To his disappointment, the

Queen was more concerned with the employment impact of his invention

and refused to grant him a patent, claiming that: “Thou aimest high, Mas-

ter Lee. Consider thou what the invention could do to my poor subjects.

It would assuredly bring to them ruin by depriving them of employment,

thus making them beggars” (cited in Acemoglu and Robinson, 2012, p.

182f). Most likely the Queen’s concern was a manifestation of the hosiers’

guilds fear that the invention would make the skills of its artisan members

obsolete.5 The guilds’ opposition was indeed so intense that William Lee

had to leave Britain.

That guilds systematically tried to weaken market forces as aggregators

to maintain the technological status quo is persuasively argued by Kellen-

benz (1974, p. 243), stating that “guilds defended the interests of their

5The term artisan refers to a craftsman who engages in the entire production process
of a good, containing almost no division of labour. By guild we mean an association of
artisans that control the practice of their craft in a particular town.

7



members against outsiders, and these included the inventors who, with

their new equipment and techniques, threatened to disturb their mem-

bers’ economic status.”6 As pointed out by Mokyr (1998, p. 11): “Unless

all individuals accept the “verdict” of the market outcome, the decision

whether to adopt an innovation is likely to be resisted by losers through

non-market mechanism and political activism.” Workers can thus be ex-

pected to resist new technologies, insofar that they make their skills obso-

lete and irreversibly reduce their expected earnings. The balance between

job conservation and technological progress therefore, to a large extent,

reflects the balance of power in society, and how gains from technological

progress are being distributed.

The British Industrial Revolution illustrates this point vividly. While

still widely present on the Continent, the craft guild in Britain had, by

the time of the Glorious Revolution of 1688, declined and lost most of its

political clout (Nef, 1957, pp. 26 and 32). With Parliamentary supremacy

established over the Crown, legislation was passed in 1769 making the de-

struction of machinery punishable by death (Mokyr, 1990, p. 257). To

be sure, there was still resistance to mechanisation. The “Luddite” riots

between 1811 and 1816 were partly a manifestation of the fear of technolog-

ical change among workers as Parliament revoked a 1551 law prohibiting

the use of gig mills in the wool-finishing trade. The British government

however took an increasingly stern view on groups attempting to halt tech-

nological progress and deployed 12,000 men against the rioters (Mantoux,

2006, p. 403-8). The sentiment of the government towards the destruction

of machinery was explained by a resolution passed after the Lancashire

riots of 1779, stating that: “The sole cause of great riots was the new ma-

chines employed in cotton manufacture; the country notwithstanding has

greatly benefited from their erection [and] destroying them in this coun-

try would only be the means of transferring them to another [. . . ] to the

detriment of the trade of Britain” (cited in Mantoux, 2006, p. 403).

There are at least two possible explanations for the shift in attitudes

6There is an ongoing debate about the technological role of the guilds. Epstein
(1998), for example, has argued that they fulfilled an important role in the intergenera-
tional transmission of knowledge. Yet there is no immediate contradiction between such
a role and their conservative stand on technological progress: there are clear examples
of guilds restraining the diffusion of inventions (see, for example, Ogilvie, 2004).

8



towards technological progress. First, after Parliamentary supremacy was

established over the Crown, the property owning classes became politically

dominant in Britain (North and Weingast, 1989). Because the diffusion

of various manufacturing technologies did not impose a risk to the value

of their assets, and some property owners stood to benefit from the ex-

port of manufactured goods, the artisans simply did not have the political

power to repress them. Second, inventors, consumers and unskilled factory

workers largely benefited from mechanisation (Mokyr, 1990, p. 256 and

258). It has even been argued that, despite the employment concerns over

mechanisation, unskilled workers have been the greatest beneficiaries of

the Industrial Revolution (Clark, 2008).7 While there is contradictory evi-

dence suggesting that capital owners initially accumulated a growing share

of national income (Allen, 2009a), there is equally evidence of growing real

wages (Lindert and Williamson, 1983; Feinstein, 1998). This implies that

although manufacturing technologies made the skills of artisans obsolete,

gains from technological progress were distributed in a manner that grad-

ually benefited a growing share of the labour force.8

An important feature of nineteenth century manufacturing technolo-

gies is that they were largely “deskilling” – i.e. they substituted for skills

through the simplification of tasks (Braverman, 1974; Hounshell, 1985;

James and Skinner, 1985; Goldin and Katz, 1998). The deskilling process

occurred as the factory system began to displace the artisan shop, and it

picked up pace as production increasingly mechanized with the adoption

7Various estimations of the living standards of workers in Britain during the indus-
trialisation exist in the literature. For example, Clark (2008) finds that real wages over
the period 1760 to 1860 rose faster than gdp per capita. Further evidence provided by
Lindert and Williamson (1983) even suggests that real wages nearly doubled between
1820 and 1850. Feinstein (1998), on the other hand, finds a much more moderate in-
crease, with average working-class living standards improving by less than 15 percent
between 1770 and 1870. Finally, Allen (2009a) finds that over the first half of the nine-
teenth century, the real wage stagnated while output per worker expanded. After the
mid nineteenth century, however, real wages began to grow in line with productivity.
While this implies that capital owners were the greatest beneficiaries of the Industrial
Revolution, there is at the same time consensus that average living standards largely
improved.

8The term skill is associated with higher levels of education, ability, or job training.
Following Goldin and Katz (1998), we refer to technology-skill or capital-skill com-
plementarity when a new technology or physical capital complements skilled labour
relative to unskilled workers.

9



of steam power (Goldin and Sokoloff, 1982; Atack, et al., 2008a). Work

that had previously been performed by artisans was now decomposed into

smaller, highly specialised, sequences, requiring less skill, but more work-

ers, to perform.9 Some innovations were even designed to be deskilling.

For example, Eli Whitney, a pioneer of interchangeable parts, described

the objective of this technology as “to substitute correct and effective op-

erations of machinery for the skill of the artist which is acquired only by

long practice and experience; a species of skill which is not possessed in

this country to any considerable extent” (Habakkuk, 1962, p. 22).

Together with developments in continuous-flow production, enabling

workers to be stationary while different tasks were moved to them, it was

identical interchangeable parts that allowed complex products to be as-

sembled from mass produced individual components by using highly spe-

cialised machine tools to a sequence of operations.10 Yet while the first

assembly-line was documented in 1804, it was not until the late nineteenth

century that continuous-flow processes started to be adopted on a larger

scale, which enabled corporations such as the Ford Motor Company to

manufacture the T-Ford at a sufficiently low price for it to become the

people’s vehicle (Mokyr, 1990, p. 137). Crucially, the new assembly line

introduced by Ford in 1913 was specifically designed for machinery to be

operated by unskilled workers (Hounshell, 1985, p. 239). Furthermore,

what had previously been a one-man job was turned into a 29-man worker

operation, reducing the overall work time by 34 percent (Bright, 1958).

The example of the Ford Motor Company thus underlines the general pat-

9The production of plows nicely illustrates the differences between the artisan shop
and the factory. In one artisan shop, two men spent 118 man-hours using hammers,
anvils, chisels, hatchets, axes, mallets, shaves and augers in 11 distinct operations to
produce a plow. By contrast, a mechanized plow factory employed 52 workers perform-
ing 97 distinct tasks, of which 72 were assisted by steam power, to produce a plow in
just 3.75 man-hours. The degree of specialization was even greater in the production of
men’s white muslin shirts. In the artisan shop, one worker spent 1439 hours performing
25 different tasks to produce 144 shirts. In the factory, it took 188 man-hours to pro-
duce the same quantity, engaging 230 different workers performing 39 different tasks,
of which more than half required steam power. The workers involved included cutters,
turners and trimmers, as well as foremen and forewomen, inspectors, errand boys, an
engineer, a fireman, and a watchman (us Department of Labor, 1899).

10These machines were sequentially implemented until the production process was
completed. Over time, such machines became much cheaper relative to skilled labor.
As a result, production became much more capital intensive (Hounshell, 1985).

10



tern observed in the nineteenth century, with physical capital providing a

relative complement to unskilled labour, while substituting for relatively

skilled artisans (James and Skinner, 1985; Louis and Paterson, 1986; Brown

and Philips, 1986; Atack, et al., 2004).11 Hence, as pointed out by Ace-

moglu (2002, p. 7): “the idea that technological advances favor more

skilled workers is a twentieth century phenomenon.” The conventional

wisdom among economic historians, in other words, suggests a discontinu-

ity between the nineteenth and twentieth century in the impact of capital

deepening on the relative demand for skilled labour.

The modern pattern of capital-skill complementarity gradually emerged

in the late nineteenth century, as manufacturing production shifted to in-

creasingly mechanised assembly lines. This shift can be traced to the

switch to electricity from steam and water-power which, in combination

with continuous-process and batch production methods, reduced the de-

mand for unskilled manual workers in many hauling, conveying, and assem-

bly tasks, but increased the demand for skills (Goldin and Katz, 1998). In

short, while factory assembly lines, with their extreme division of labour,

had required vast quantities of human operatives, electrification allowed

many stages of the production process to be automated, which in turn in-

creased the demand for relatively skilled blue-collar production workers to

operate the machinery. In addition, electrification contributed to a grow-

ing share of white-collar nonproduction workers (Goldin and Katz, 1998).

Over the course of the nineteenth century, establishments became larger

in size as steam and water power technologies improved, allowing them to

11Williamson and Lindert (1980), on the other hand, find a relative rise in wage
premium of skilled labour over the period 1820 to 1860, which they partly attribute to
capital deepening. Their claim of growing wage inequality over this period has, however,
been challenged (Margo, 2000). Yet seen over the long-run, a more refined explanation is
that the manufacturing share of the labour force in the nineteenth century hollowed out.
This is suggested by recent findings, revealing a decline of middle-skill artisan jobs in
favour of both high-skill white collar workers and low-skill operatives (Gray, 2013; Katz
and Margo, 2013). Furthermore, even if the share of operatives was increasing due to
organizational change within manufacturing and overall manufacturing growth, it does
not follow that the share of unskilled labor was rising in the aggregate economy, because
some of the growth in the share of operatives may have come at the expense of a decrease
in the share of workers employed as low-skilled farm workers in agriculture (Katz and
Margo, 2013). Nevertheless, this evidence is consistent with the literature showing that
relatively skilled artisans were replaced by unskilled factory workers, suggesting that
technological change in manufacturing was deskilling.

11



adopt powered machinery to realize productivity gains through the combi-

nation of enhanced division of labour and higher capital intensity (Atack,

et al., 2008a). Furthermore, the transport revolution lowered costs of ship-

ping goods domestically and internationally as infrastructure spread and

improved (Atack, et al., 2008b). The market for artisan goods early on had

largely been confined to the immediate surrounding area because trans-

port costs were high relative to the value of the goods produced. With the

transport revolution, however, market size expanded, thereby eroding local

monopoly power, which in turn increased competition and compelled firms

to raise productivity through mechanisation. As establishments became

larger and served geographically expended markets, managerial tasks in-

creased in number and complexity, requiring more managerial and clerking

employees (Chandler, 1977). This pattern was, by the turn of the twen-

tieth century, reinforced by electrification, which not only contributed to

a growing share of relatively skilled blue-collar labour, but also increased

the demand for white-collar workers (Goldin and Katz, 1998), who tended

to have higher educational attainment (Allen, 2001).12

Since electrification, the story of the twentieth century has been the

race between education and technology (Goldin and Katz, 2009). The us

high school movement coincided with the first industrial revolution of the

office (Goldin and Katz, 1995). While the typewriter was invented in the

1860s, it was not introduced in the office until the early twentieth century,

when it entered a wave of mechanisation, with dictaphones, calculators,

mimeo machines, address machines, and the predecessor of the computer

– the keypunch (Beniger, 1986; Cortada, 2000). Importantly, these office

machines reduced the cost of information processing tasks and increased

the demand for the complementary factor – i.e. educated office workers.

Yet the increased supply of educated office workers, following the high

school movement, was associated with a sharp decline in the wage premium

of clerking occupations relative to production workers (Goldin and Katz,

1995). This was, however, not the result of deskilling technological change.

12Most likely, the growing share of white-collar workers increased the element of
human interaction in employment. Notably, Michaels, et al. (2013) find that the increase
in the employment share of interactive occupations, going hand in hand with an increase
in their relative wage bill share, was particularly strong between 1880 and 1930, which
is a period of rapid change in communication and transport technology.

12



Clerking workers were indeed relatively educated. Rather, it was the result

of the supply of educated workers outpacing the demand for their skills,

leading educational wage differentials to compress.

While educational wage differentials in the us narrowed from 1915 to

1980 (Goldin and Katz, 2009), both educational wage differentials and

overall wage inequality have increased sharply since the 1980s in a number

of countries (Krueger, 1993; Murphy, et al., 1998; Atkinson, 2008; Goldin

and Katz, 2009). Although there are clearly several variables at work, con-

sensus is broad that this can be ascribed to an acceleration in capital-skill

complementarity, driven by the adoption of computers and information

technology (Krueger, 1993; Autor, et al., 1998; Bresnahan, et al., 2002).

What is commonly referred to as the Computer Revolution began with the

first commercial uses of computers around 1960 and continued through the

development of the Internet and e-commerce in the 1990s. As the cost per

computation declined at an annual average of 37 percent between 1945

and 1980 (Nordhaus, 2007), telephone operators were made redundant,

the first industrial robot was introduced by General Motors in the 1960s,

and in the 1970s airline reservations systems led the way in self-service

technology (Gordon, 2012). During the 1980s and 1990s, computing costs

declined even more rapidly, on average by 64 percent per year, accompa-

nied by a surge in computational power (Nordhaus, 2007).13 At the same

time, bar-code scanners and cash machines were spreading across the retail

and financial industries, and the first personal computers were introduced

in the early 1980s, with their word processing and spreadsheet functions

eliminating copy typist occupations and allowing repetitive calculations

to be automated (Gordon, 2012). This substitution for labour marks a

further important reversal. The early twentieth century office machines

increased the demand for clerking workers (Chandler, 1977; Goldin and

Katz, 1995). In a similar manner, computerisation augments demand for

such tasks, but it also permits them to be automated (Autor, et al., 2003).

The Computer Revolution can go some way in explaining the growing

wage inequality of the past decades. For example, Krueger (1993) finds

that workers using a computer earn roughly earn 10 to 15 percent more

13Computer power even increased 18 percent faster on annual basis than predicted
by Moore’s Law, implying a doubling every two years (Nordhaus, 2007).

13



than others, but also that computer use accounts for a substantial share

of the increase in the rate of return to education. In addition, more re-

cent studies find that computers have caused a shift in the occupational

structure of the labour market. Autor and Dorn (2013), for example, show

that as computerisation erodes wages for labour performing routine tasks,

workers will reallocate their labour supply to relatively low-skill service

occupations. More specifically, between 1980 and 2005, the share of us

labour hours in service occupations grew by 30 percent after having been

flat or declining in the three prior decades. Furthermore, net changes

in us employment were U-shaped in skill level, meaning that the lowest

and highest job-skill quartile expanded sharply with relative employment

declines in the middle of the distribution.

The expansion in high-skill employment can be explained by the falling

price of carrying out routine tasks by means of computers, which comple-

ments more abstract and creative services. Seen from a production func-

tion perspective, an outward shift in the supply of routine informational

inputs increases the marginal productivity of workers they are demanded

by. For example, text and data mining has improved the quality of le-

gal research as constant access to market information has improved the

efficiency of managerial decision-making – i.e. tasks performed by skilled

workers at the higher end of the income distribution. The result has been

an increasingly polarised labour market, with growing employment in high-

income cognitive jobs and low-income manual occupations, accompanied

by a hollowing-out of middle-income routine jobs. This is a pattern that

is not unique to the us and equally applies to a number of developed

economies (Goos, et al., 2009).14

How technological progress in the twenty-first century will impact on

14While there is broad consensus that computers substituting for workers in routine-
intensive tasks has driven labour market polarisation over the past decades, there are,
indeed, alternative explanations. For example, technological advances in computing
have dramatically lowered the cost of leaving information-based tasks to foreign work-
sites (Jensen and Kletzer, 2005; Blinder, 2009; Jensen and Kletzer, 2010; Oldenski, 2012;
Blinder and Krueger, 2013). The decline in the routine-intensity of employment is thus
likely to result from a combination of offshoring and automation. Furthermore, there
is evidence suggesting that improvements in transport and communication technology
have augmented occupations involving human interaction, spanning across both cog-
nitive and manual tasks (Michaels, et al., 2013). These explanations are nevertheless
equally related to advance in computing and communications technology.

14



labour market outcomes remains to be seen. Throughout history, techno-

logical progress has vastly shifted the composition of employment, from

agriculture and the artisan shop, to manufacturing and clerking, to service

and management occupations. Yet the concern over technological unem-

ployment has proven to be exaggerated. The obvious reason why this

concern has not materialised relates to Ricardo’s famous chapter on ma-

chinery, which suggests that labour-saving technology reduces the demand

for undifferentiated labour, thus leading to technological unemployment

(Ricardo, 1819). As economists have long understood, however, an inven-

tion that replaces workers by machines will have effects on all product and

factor markets. An increase in the efficiency of production which reduces

the price of one good, will increase real income and thus increase demand

for other goods. Hence, in short, technological progress has two compet-

ing effects on employment (Aghion and Howitt, 1994). First, as technology

substitutes for labour, there is a destruction effect, requiring workers to

reallocate their labour supply; and second, there is the capitalisation ef-

fect, as more companies enter industries where productivity is relatively

high, leading employment in those industries to expand.

Although the capitalisation effect has been predominant historically,

our discovery of means of economising the use of labour can outrun the

pace at which we can find new uses for labour, as Keynes (1933) pointed

out. The reason why human labour has prevailed relates to its ability to

adopt and acquire new skills by means of education (Goldin and Katz,

2009). Yet as computerisation enters more cognitive domains this will

become increasingly challenging (Brynjolfsson and McAfee, 2011). Re-

cent empirical findings are therefore particularly concerning. For example,

Beaudry, et al. (2013) document a decline in the demand for skill over the

past decade, even as the supply of workers with higher education has con-

tinued to grow. They show that high-skilled workers have moved down the

occupational ladder, taking on jobs traditionally performed by low-skilled

workers, pushing low-skilled workers even further down the occupational

ladder and, to some extent, even out of the labour force. This raises

questions about: (a) the ability of human labour to win the race against

technology by means of education; and (b) the potential extent of techno-

logical unemployment, as an increasing pace of technological progress will

15



cause higher job turnover, resulting in a higher natural rate of unemploy-
ment (Lucas and Prescott, 1974; Davis and Haltiwanger, 1992; Pissarides, 
2000). While the present study is limited to examining the destruction 
effect of technology, it nevertheless provides a useful indication of the job 
growth required to counterbalance the jobs at risk over the next decades.

3 The technological revolutions of the     
twenty-first century

The secular price decline in the real cost of computing has created vast eco-

nomic incentives for employers to substitute labour for computer capital.15

Yet the tasks computers are able to perform ultimately depend upon the

ability of a programmer to write a set of procedures or rules that appropri-

ately direct the technology in each possible contingency. Computers will

therefore be relatively productive to human labour when a problem can be

specified – in the sense that the criteria for success are quantifiable and can

readily be evaluated (Acemoglu and Autor, 2011). The extent of job com-

puterisation will thus be determined by technological advances that allow

engineering problems to be sufficiently specified, which sets the boundaries

for the scope of computerisation. In this section, we examine the extent of

tasks computer-controlled equipment can be expected to perform over the

next decades. Doing so, we focus on advances in fields related to Machine

Learning (ml), including Data Mining, Machine Vision, Computational

Statistics and other sub-fields of Artificial Intelligence (ai), in which ef-

forts are explicitly dedicated to the development of algorithms that allow

cognitive tasks to be automated. In addition, we examine the applica-

tion of ml technologies in Mobile Robotics (mr), and thus the extent of

computerisation in manual tasks.

Our analysis builds on the task categorisation of Autor, et al. (2003),

which distinguishes between workplace tasks using a two-by-two matrix,

with routine versus non-routine tasks on one axis, and manual versus cogni-

tive tasks on the other. In short, routine tasks are defined as tasks that fol-

15We refer to computer capital as accumulated computers and computer-controlled
equipment by means of capital deepening.

16



low explicit rules that can be accomplished by machines, while non-routine

tasks are not sufficiently well understood to be specified in computer code.

Each of these task categories can, in turn, be of either manual or cognitive

nature – i.e. they relate to physical labour or knowledge work. Historically,

computerisation has largely been confined to manual and cognitive routine

tasks involving explicit rule-based activities (Autor and Dorn, 2013; Goos,

et al., 2009). Following recent technological advances, however, computeri-

sation is now spreading to domains commonly defined as non-routine. The

rapid pace at which tasks that were defined as non-routine only a decade

ago have now become computerisable is illustrated by Autor, et al. (2003),

asserting that: “Navigating a car through city traffic or deciphering the

scrawled handwriting on a personal check – minor undertakings for most

adults – are not routine tasks by our definition.” Today, the problems

of navigating a car and deciphering handwriting are sufficiently well un-

derstood that many related tasks can be specified in computer code and

automated (Veres, et al., 2011; Plötz and Fink, 2009).

Recent technological breakthroughs are, in large part, due to efforts to

turn non-routine tasks into well-defined problems. Defining such problems

is helped by the provision of relevant data: this is highlighted in the case

of handwriting recognition by Plötz and Fink (2009). The success of an

algorithm for handwriting recognition is difficult to quantify without data

to test on – in particular, determining whether an algorithm performs

well for different styles of writing requires data containing a variety of

such styles. That is, data is required to specify the many contingencies a

technology must manage in order to form an adequate substitute for human

labour. With data, objective and quantifiable measures of the success of

an algorithm can be produced, which aid the continual improvement of its

performance relative to humans.

As such, technological progress has been aided by the recent produc-

tion of increasingly large and complex datasets, known as big data.16 For

instance, with a growing corpus of human-translated digitalised text, the

16Predictions by Cisco Systems suggest that the Internet traffic in 2016 will be around
1 zettabyte (1× 1021 bytes) (Cisco, 2012). In comparison, the information contained in
all books worldwide is about 480 terabytes (5× 1014 bytes), and a text transcript of all
the words ever spoken by humans would represent about 5 exabytes (5 × 1018 bytes)
(uc Berkeley School of Information, 2003).

17



success of a machine translator can now be judged by its accuracy in re-
producing observed translations. Data from United Nations documents, 
which are translated by human experts into six languages, allow Google 
Translate to monitor and improve the performance of different machine 
translation algorithms (Tanner, 2007).

Further, ml algorithms can discover unexpected similarities between 
old and new data, aiding the computerisation of tasks for which big data 
has newly become available. As a result, computerisation is no longer 
confined to routine tasks that can be written as rule-based software queries, 
but is spreading to every non-routine task where big data becomes available 
(Brynjolfsson and McAfee, 2011). In this section, we examine the extent 
of future computerisation beyond routine tasks.

3.1 Computerisation in non-routine cognitive tasks

With the availability of big data, a wide range of non-routine cognitive 
tasks are becoming computerisable. That is, further to the general im-
provement in technological progress due to big data, algorithms for big 
data are rapidly entering domains reliant upon storing or accessing inf-
ormation. The use of big data is afforded by one of the chief compara-
tive advantages of computers relative to human labor: scalability. Little 
evidence is required to demonstrate that, in performing the task of labo-
rious computation, networks of machines scale better than human labour 
(Campbell-Kelly, 2009). As such, computers can better manage the large 
calculations required in using large datasets. ml algorithms running on 
computers are now, in many cases, better able to detect patterns in big 
data than humans.

Computerisation of cognitive tasks is also aided by another core com-
parative advantage of algorithms: their absence of some human biases. An 
algorithm can be designed to ruthlessly satisfy the small range of tasks it is 
given. Humans, in contrast, must fulfill a range of tasks unrelated to their 
occupation, such as sleeping, necessitating occasional sacrifices in their 
occupational performance (Kahneman, et al., 1982). The additional con-
straints under which humans must operate manifest themselves as biases. 
Consider an example of human bias: Danziger, et al. (2011) demonstrate

18



that experienced Israeli judges are substantially more generous in their

rulings following a lunch break. It can thus be argued that many roles in-

volving decision-making will benefit from impartial algorithmic solutions.

Fraud detection is a task that requires both impartial decision making

and the ability to detect trends in big data. As such, this task is now

almost completely automated (Phua, et al., 2010). In a similar manner,

the comparative advantages of computers are likely to change the nature

of work across a wide range of industries and occupations.

In health care, diagnostics tasks are already being computerised. On-

cologists at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center are, for example,

using ibm’s Watson computer to provide chronic care and cancer treat-

ment diagnostics. Knowledge from 600,000 medical evidence reports, 1.5

million patient records and clinical trials, and two million pages of text

from medical journals, are used for benchmarking and pattern recognition

purposes. This allows the computer to compare each patient’s individual

symptoms, genetics, family and medication history, etc., to diagnose and

develop a treatment plan with the highest probability of success (Cohn,

2013).

In addition, computerisation is entering the domains of legal and finan-

cial services. Sophisticated algorithms are gradually taking on a number

of tasks performed by paralegals, contract and patent lawyers (Markoff,

2011). More specifically, law firms now rely on computers that can scan

thousands of legal briefs and precedents to assist in pre-trial research. A

frequently cited example is Symantec’s Clearwell system, which uses lan-

guage analysis to identify general concepts in documents, can present the

results graphically, and proved capable of analysing and sorting more than

570,000 documents in two days (Markoff, 2011).

Furthermore, the improvement of sensing technology has made sen-

sor data one of the most prominent sources of big data (Ackerman and

Guizzo, 2011). Sensor data is often coupled with new ml fault- and

anomaly-detection algorithms to render many tasks computerisable. A

broad class of examples can be found in condition monitoring and novelty

detection, with technology substituting for closed-circuit tv (cctv) oper-

ators, workers examining equipment defects, and clinical staff responsible

for monitoring the state of patients in intensive care. Here, the fact that

19



computers lack human biases is of great value: algorithms are free of ir-

rational bias, and their vigilance need not be interrupted by rest breaks

or lapses of concentration. Following the declining costs of digital sensing

and actuation, ml approaches have successfully addressed condition mon-

itoring applications ranging from batteries (Saha, et al., 2007), to aircraft

engines (King, et al., 2009), water quality (Osborne, et al., 2012) and in-

tensive care units (icus) (Clifford and Clifton, 2012; Clifton, et al., 2012).

Sensors can equally be placed on trucks and pallets to improve companies’

supply chain management, and used to measure the moisture in a field of

crops to track the flow of water through utility pipes. This allows for au-

tomatic meter reading, eliminating the need for personnel to gather such

information. For example, the cities of Doha, São Paulo, and Beijing use

sensors on pipes, pumps, and other water infrastructure to monitor con-

ditions and manage water loss, reducing leaks by 40 to 50 percent. In the

near future, it will be possible to place inexpensive sensors on light poles,

sidewalks, and other public property to capture sound and images, likely

reducing the number of workers in law enforcement (MGI, 2013).

Advances in user interfaces also enable computers to respond directly

to a wider range of human requests, thus augmenting the work of highly

skilled labour, while allowing some types of jobs to become fully auto-

mated. For example, Apple’s Siri and Google Now rely on natural user

interfaces to recognise spoken words, interpret their meanings, and act

on them accordingly. Moreover, a company called SmartAction now pro-

vides call computerisation solutions that use ml technology and advanced

speech recognition to improve upon conventional interactive voice response

systems, realising cost savings of 60 to 80 percent over an outsourced call

center consisting of human labour (CAA, 2012). Even education, one of

the most labour intensive sectors, will most likely be significantly impacted

by improved user interfaces and algorithms building upon big data. The

recent growth in moocs (Massive Open Online Courses) has begun to gen-

erate large datasets detailing how students interact on forums, their dili-

gence in completing assignments and viewing lectures, and their ultimate

grades (Simonite, 2013; Breslow, et al., 2013). Such information, together

with improved user interfaces, will allow for ml algorithms that serve as

interactive tutors, with teaching and assessment strategies statistically cal-

20



ibrated to match individual student needs (Woolf, 2010). Big data analysis

will also allow for more effective predictions of student performance, and

for their suitability for post-graduation occupations. These technologies

can equally be implemented in recruitment, most likely resulting in the

streamlining of human resource (hr) departments.

Occupations that require subtle judgement are also increasingly sus-

ceptible to computerisation. To many such tasks, the unbiased decision

making of an algorithm represents a comparative advantage over human

operators. In the most challenging or critical applications, as in icus, algo-

rithmic recommendations may serve as inputs to human operators; in other

circumstances, algorithms will themselves be responsible for appropriate

decision-making. In the financial sector, such automated decision-making

has played a role for quite some time. ai algorithms are able to process a

greater number of financial announcements, press releases, and other inf-

ormation than any human trader, and then act faster upon them (Mims,

2010). Services like Future Advisor similarly use ai to offer personalised

financial advice at larger scale and lower cost. Even the work of software

engineers may soon largely be computerisable. For example, advances in

ml allow a programmer to leave complex parameter and design choices

to be appropriately optimised by an algorithm (Hoos, 2012). Algorithms

can further automatically detect bugs in software (Hangal and Lam, 2002;

Livshits and Zimmermann, 2005; Kim, et al., 2008), with a reliability that

humans are unlikely to match. Big databases of code also offer the eventual

prospect of algorithms that learn how to write programs to satisfy spec-

ifications provided by a human. Such an approach is likely to eventually

improve upon human programmers, in the same way that human-written

compilers eventually proved inferior to automatically optimised compilers.

An algorithm can better keep the whole of a program in working memory,

and is not constrained to human-intelligible code, allowing for holistic solu-

tions that might never occur to a human. Such algorithmic improvements

over human judgement are likely to become increasingly common.

Although the extent of these developments remains to be seen, esti-

mates by MGI (2013) suggests that sophisticated algorithms could sub-

stitute for approximately 140 million full-time knowledge workers world-

wide. Hence, while technological progress throughout economic history

21



has largely been confined to the mechanisation of manual tasks, requir-
ing physical labour, technological progress in the twenty-first century can 
be expected to contribute to a wide range of cognitive tasks, which, until 
now, have largely remained a human domain. Of course, many occupations 
being affected by these developments are still far from fully computeris-
able, meaning that the computerisation of some tasks will simply free-up 
time for human labour to perform other tasks. Nonetheless, the trend is 
clear: computers increasingly challenge human labour in a wide range of 
cognitive tasks (Brynjolfsson and McAfee, 2011).

3.2 Computerisation in non-routine manual tasks
Mobile robotics provides a means of directly leveraging ml technologies 
to aid the computerisation of a growing scope of manual tasks. The con-
tinued technological development of robotic hardware is having notable 
impact upon employment: over the past decades, industrial robots have 
taken on the routine tasks of most operatives in manufacturing. Now, 
however, more advanced robots are gaining enhanced sensors and manipu-
lators, allowing them to perform non-routine manual tasks. For example, 
General Electric has recently developed robots to climb and maintain wind 
turbines, and more flexible surgical robots with a greater range of motion 
will soon perform more types of operations (Robotics-VO, 2013). In a 
similar manner, the computerisation of logistics is being aided by the in-
creasing cost-effectiveness of highly instrumented and computerised cars. 
Mass-production vehicles, such as the Nissan leaf, contain on-board com-
puters and advanced telecommunication equipment that render the car a 
potentially fly-by-wire robot.17 Advances in sensor technology mean that 
vehicles are likely to soon be augmented with even more advanced suites of 
sensors. These will permit an algorithmic vehicle controller to monitor its 
environment to a degree that exceeds the capabilities of any human driver: 
they have the ability to simultaneously look both forwards and backwards, 
can natively integrate camera, gps and lidar data, and are not subject 
to distraction. Algorithms are thus potentially safer and more effective 
drivers than humans.

17A fly-by-wire robot is a robot that is controllable by a remote computer.

22



The big data provided by these improved sensors are offering solutions

to many of the engineering problems that had hindered robotic develop-

ment in the past. In particular, the creation of detailed three dimensional

maps of road networks has enabled autonomous vehicle navigation; most

notably illustrated by Google’s use of large, specialised datasets collected

by its driverless cars (Guizzo, 2011). It is now completely feasible to store

representations of the entire road network on-board a car, dramatically

simplifying the navigation problem. Algorithms that could perform navi-

gation throughout the changing seasons, particularly after snowfall, have

been viewed as a substantial challenge. However, the big data approach

can answer this by storing records from the last time snow fell, against

which the vehicle’s current environment can be compared (Churchill and

Newman, 2012). ml approaches have also been developed to identify un-

precedented changes to a particular piece of the road network, such as

roadworks (Mathibela, et al., 2012). This emerging technology will affect a

variety of logistics jobs. Agricultural vehicles, forklifts and cargo-handling

vehicles are imminently automatable, and hospitals are already employing

autonomous robots to transport food, prescriptions and samples (Bloss,

2011). The computerisation of mining vehicles is further being pursued

by companies such as Rio Tinto, seeking to replace labour in Australian

mine-sites.18

With improved sensors, robots are capable of producing goods with

higher quality and reliability than human labour. For example, El Dulze, a

Spanish food processor, now uses robotics to pick up heads of lettuce from a

conveyor belt, rejecting heads that do not comply with company standards.

This is achieved by measuring their density and replacing them on the

belt (IFR, 2012a). Advanced sensors further allow robots to recognise

patterns. Baxter, a 22,000 usd general-purpose robot, provides a well-

known example. The robot features an lcd display screen displaying a pair

of eyes that take on different expressions depending on the situation. When

the robot is first installed or needs to learn a new pattern, no programming

is required. A human worker simply guides the robot arms through the

motions that will be needed for the task. Baxter then memorises these

18Rio Tinto’s computerisation efforts are advertised at http://www.mineofthefuture.
com.au.

23



patterns and can communicate that it has understood its new instructions.

While the physical flexibility of Baxter is limited to performing simple

operations such as picking up objects and moving them, different standard

attachments can be installed on its arms, allowing Baxter to perform a

relatively broad scope of manual tasks at low cost (MGI, 2013).

Technological advances are contributing to declining costs in robotics.

Over the past decades, robot prices have fallen about 10 percent annually

and are expected to decline at an even faster pace in the near future (MGI,

2013). Industrial robots, with features enabled by machine vision and high-

precision dexterity, which typically cost 100,000 to 150,000 usd, will be

available for 50,000 to 75,000 usd in the next decade, with higher levels

of intelligence and additional capabilities (IFR, 2012b). Declining robot

prices will inevitably place them within reach of more users. For example,

in China, employers are increasingly incentivised to substitute robots for

labour, as wages and living standards are rising – Foxconn, a Chinese

contract manufacturer that employs 1.2 million workers, is now investing

in robots to assemble products such as the Apple iPhone (Markoff, 2012).

According to the International Federation of Robotics, robot sales in China

grew by more than 50 percent in 2011 and are expected to increase further.

Globally, industrial robot sales reached a record 166,000 units in 2011, a

40 percent year-on-year increase (IFR, 2012b). Most likely, there will be

even faster growth ahead as low-priced general-purpose models, such as

Baxter, are adopted in simple manufacturing and service work.

Expanding technological capabilities and declining costs will make en-

tirely new uses for robots possible. Robots will likely continue to take on

an increasing set of manual tasks in manufacturing, packing, construction,

maintenance, and agriculture. In addition, robots are already performing

many simple service tasks such as vacuuming, mopping, lawn mowing, and

gutter cleaning – the market for personal and household service robots is

growing by about 20 percent annually (MGI, 2013). Meanwhile, commer-

cial service robots are now able to perform more complex tasks in food

preparation, health care, commercial cleaning, and elderly care (Robotics-

VO, 2013). As robot costs decline and technological capabilities expand,

robots can thus be expected to gradually substitute for labour in a wide

range of low-wage service occupations, where most us job growth has oc-

24



curred over the past decades (Autor and Dorn, 2013). This means that 
many low-wage manual jobs that have been previously protected from 
computerisation could diminish over time.

3.3 The task model revisited

The task model of Autor, et al. (2003) has delivered intuitive and accu-
rate predictions in that: (a) computers are more substitutable for human 
labour in routine relative to non-routine tasks; and (b) a greater inten-
sity of routine inputs increases the marginal productivity of non-routine 
inputs. Accordingly, computers have served as a substitute for labour 
for many routine tasks, while exhibiting strong complementarities with 
labour performing cognitive non-routine tasks.19 Yet the premises about 
what computers do have recently expanded. Computer capital can now 
equally substitute for a wide range of tasks commonly defined as non-
routine (Brynjolfsson and McAfee, 2011), meaning that the task model 
will not hold in predicting the impact of computerisation on the task con-
tent of employment in the twenty-first century. While focusing on the 
substitution effects of recent technological progress, we build on the task 
model by deriving several factors that we expect will determine the extent 
of computerisation in non-routine tasks.

The task model assumes for tractability an aggregate, constant-returns-
to-scale, Cobb-Douglas production function of the form

(1) Q = (LS + C)
1−βL

β
NS, β ∈ [0, 1],

where LS and LNS are susceptible and non-susceptible labor inputs and C

is computer capital. Computer capital is supplied perfectly elastically at

market price per efficiency unit, where the market price is falling exoge-

nously with time due to technological progress. It further assumes income-

maximizing workers, with heterogeneous productivity endowments in both

susceptible and non-susceptible tasks. Their task supply will respond elas-

tically to relative wage levels, meaning that workers will reallocate their

19The model does not predict any substantial substitution or complementarity with
non-routine manual tasks.

25



labour supply according to their comparative advantage as in Roy (1951).

With expanding computational capabilities, resulting from technological

advances, and a falling market price of computing, workers in susceptible

tasks will thus reallocate to non-susceptible tasks.

The above described simple model differs from the task model of Autor,

et al. (2003), in that LNS is not confined to routine labour inputs. This

is because recent developments in ml and mr, building upon big data,

allow for pattern recognition, and thus enable computer capital to rapidly

substitute for labour across a wide range of non-routine tasks. Yet some in-

hibiting engineering bottlenecks to computerisation persist. Beyond these

bottlenecks, however, we argue that it is largely already technologically

possible to automate almost any task, provided that sufficient amounts of

data are gathered for pattern recognition. Our model thus predicts that

the pace at which these bottlenecks can be overcome will determine the

extent of computerisation in the twenty-first century.

Hence, in short, while the task model predicts that computers for labour

substitution will be confined to routine tasks, our model predicts that com-

puterisation can be extended to any non-routine task that is not subject

to any engineering bottlenecks to computerisation. These bottlenecks thus

set the boundaries for the computerisation of non-routine tasks. Drawing

upon the ml and mr literature, and a workshop held at the Oxford Uni-

versity Engineering Sciences Department, we identify several engineering

bottlenecks, corresponding to three task categories. According to these

findings, non-susceptible labor inputs can be described as,

(2) LNS =
n

∑

i=1

(

LPM,i + LC,i + LSI,i
)

where LPM, LC and LSI are labour inputs into perception and manipulation

tasks, creative intelligence tasks, and and social intelligence tasks.

We note that some related engineering bottlenecks can be partially al-

leviated by the simplification of tasks. One generic way of achieving this

is to reduce the variation between task iterations. As a prototypical ex-

ample, consider the factory assembly line, turning the non-routine tasks

26



of the artisan shop into repetitive routine tasks performed by unskilled 
factory workers. A more recent example is the computerisation of non-
routine manual tasks in construction. On-site construction tasks typically 
demand a high degree of adaptability, so as to accommodate work environ-
ments that are typically irregularly laid out, and vary according to weather. 
Prefabrication, in which the construction object is partially assembled in 
a factory before being transported to the construction site, provides a 
way of largely removing the requirement for adaptability. It allows many 
construction tasks to be performed by robots under controlled conditions 
that eliminate task variability – a method that is becoming increasingly 
widespread, particularly in Japan (Barlow and Ozaki, 2005; Linner and 
Bock, 2012). The extent of computerisation in the twenty-first century 
will thus partly depend on innovative approaches to task restructuring. 
In the remainder of this section we examine the engineering bottlenecks 
related to the above mentioned task categories, each in turn.

Perception and manipulation tasks. Robots are still unable to match 
the depth and breadth of human perception. While basic geometric identi-
fication is reasonably mature, enabled by the rapid development of sophis-
ticated sensors and lasers, significant challenges remain for more complex 
perception tasks, such as identifying objects and their properties in a clut-
tered field of view. As such, tasks that relate to an unstructured work 
environment can make jobs less susceptible to computerisation. For exam-
ple, most homes are unstructured, requiring the identification of a plural-
ity of irregular objects and containing many cluttered spaces which inhibit 
the mobility of wheeled objects. Conversely, supermarkets, factories, ware-
houses, airports and hospitals have been designed for large wheeled objects, 
making it easier for robots to navigate in performing non-routine manual 
tasks. Perception problems can, however, sometimes be sidestepped by 
clever task design. For example, Kiva Systems, acquired by Amazon.com 
in 2012, solved the problem of warehouse navigation by simply placing 
bar-code stickers on the floor, informing robots of their precise location 
(Guizzo, 2008).

The difficulty of perception has ramifications for manipulation tasks, 
and, in particular, the handling of irregular objects, for which robots are

27



yet to reach human levels of aptitude. This has been evidenced in the de-
velopment of robots that interact with human objects and environments. 
While advances have been made, solutions tend to be unreliable over the 
myriad small variations on a single task, repeated thousands of times a 
day, that many applications require. A related challenge is failure recov-
ery – i.e. identifying and rectifying the mistakes of the robot when it has, 
for example, dropped an object. Manipulation is also limited by the diffi-
culties of planning out the sequence of actions required to move an object 
from one place to another. There are yet further problems in designing 
manipulators that, like human limbs, are soft, have compliant dynamics 
and provide useful tactile feedback. Most industrial manipulation makes 
uses of workarounds to these challenges (Brown, et al., 2010), but these 
approaches are nonetheless limited to a narrow range of tasks. The main 
challenges to robotic computerisation, perception and manipulation, thus 
largely remain and are unlikely to be fully resolved in the next decade or 
two (Robotics-VO, 2013).

Creative intelligence tasks. The psychological processes underlying 
human creativity are difficult to specify. According to Boden (2003), cre-
ativity is the ability to come up with ideas or artifacts that are novel and 
valuable. Ideas, in a broader sense, include concepts, poems, musical com-
positions, scientific theories, cooking recipes and jokes, whereas artifacts 
are objects such as paintings, sculptures, machinery, and pottery. One 
process of creating ideas (and similarly for artifacts) involves making un-
familiar combinations of familiar ideas, requiring a rich store of knowledge. 
The challenge here is to find some reliable means of arriving at combina-
tions that “make sense.” For a computer to make a subtle joke, for example, 
would require a database with a richness of knowledge comparable to that 
of humans, and methods of benchmarking the algorithm’s subtlety.

In principle, such creativity is possible and some approaches to cre-
ativity already exist in the literature. Duvenaud, et al. (2013) provide 
an example of automating the core creative task required in order to per-
form statistics, that of designing models for data. As to artistic creativ-
ity, aaron, a drawing-program, has generated thousands of stylistically-
similar line-drawings, which have been exhibited in galleries worldwide.

28



Furthermore, David Cope’s emi software composes music in many differ-
ent styles, reminiscent of specific human composers.

In these and many other applications, generating novelty is not partic-
ularly difficult. Instead, the principal obstacle to computerising creativity 
is stating our creative values sufficiently clearly that they can be encoded 
in an program (Boden, 2003). Moreover, human values change over time 
and vary across cultures. Because creativity, by definition, involves not 
only novelty but value, and because values are highly variable, it follows 
that many arguments about creativity are rooted in disagreements about 
value. Thus, even if we could identify and encode our creative values, to 
enable the computer to inform and monitor its own activities accordingly, 
there would still be disagreement about whether the computer appeared to 
be creative. In the absence of engineering solutions to overcome this prob-
lem, it seems unlikely that occupations requiring a high degree of creative 
intelligence will be automated in the next decades.

Social intelligence tasks. Human social intelligence is important in a 
wide range of work tasks, such as those involving negotiation, persuasion 
and care. To aid the computerisation of such tasks, active research is be-
ing undertaken within the fields of Affective Computing (Scherer, et al., 
2010; Picard, 2010), and Social Robotics (Ge, 2007; Broekens, et al., 2009). 
While algorithms and robots can now reproduce some aspects of human 
social interaction, the real-time recognition of natural human emotion re-
mains a challenging problem, and the ability to respond intelligently to 
such inputs is even more difficult. Even simplified versions of typical so-
cial tasks prove difficult for computers, as is the case in which social in-
teraction is reduced to pure text. The social intelligence of algorithms is 
partly captured by the Turing test, examining the ability of a machine 
to communicate indistinguishably from an actual human. Since 1990, the 
Loebner Prize, an annual Turing test competition, awards prizes to textual 
chat programmes that are considered to be the most human-like. In each 
competition, a human judge simultaneously holds computer-based textual 
interactions with both an algorithm and a human. Based on the responses, 
the judge is to distinguish between the two. Sophisticated algorithms have 
so far failed to convince judges about their human resemblance. This is

29



replacemen

P
ro

ba
bi

lit
y

of
C

om
pu

te
ri

sa
ti
on

Social Intelligence

Dishwasher

Event
Planner

Public
Relations

0 100

0

1

P
ro

ba
bi

lit
y

of
C

om
pu

te
ri

sa
ti
on

Creativity

Court Clerk

Biologist

Fashion
Designer

0 100

0

1

P
ro

ba
bi

lit
y

of
C

om
pu

te
ri

sa
ti
on

Perception and manipulation

Telemarketer

Boilermaker

Surgeon

0 100

0

1

Figure 1. A sketch of how the probability of computerisation might vary as a 
function of bottleneck variables

largely because there is much ‘common sense’ information possessed by 
humans, which is difficult to articulate, that would need to be provided to 
algorithms if they are to function in human social settings.

Whole brain emulation, the scanning, mapping and digitalising of a 
human brain, is one possible approach to achieving this, but is currently 
only a theoretical technology. For brain emulation to become operational, 
additional functional understanding is required to recognise what data 
is relevant, as well as a roadmap of technologies needed to implement 
it. While such roadmaps exist, present implementation estimates, under 
certain assumptions, suggest that whole brain emulation is unlikely to 
become operational within the next decade or two (Sandberg and Bostrom, 
2008). When or if they do, however, the employment impact is likely to 
be vast (Hanson, 2001).

Hence, in short, while sophisticated algorithms and developments in 
mr, building upon with big data, now allow many non-routine tasks to 
be automated, occupa tions that involve complex perception and manip-
ulation tasks, creative intelligence tasks, and social intelligence tasks are 
unlikely to be substituted by computer capital over the next decade or 
two. The probability of an occupation being automated can thus be de-
scribed as a function of these task characteristics. As suggested by Figure 
1, the low degree of social intelligence required by a dishwasher makes this 
occupation more susceptible to computerisation than a public relation spe-
cialist, for example. We proceed to examining the susceptibility of jobs to 
computerisation as a function of the above described non-susceptible task 
characteristics.

30



4 Measuring the employment impact of com-
puterisation

4.1 Data sources and implementation strategy

To implement the above described methodology, we rely on o∗net, an 
online service developed for the us Department of Labor. The 2010 ver-
sion of o∗net contains information on 903 detailed occupations, most of 
which correspond closely to the Labor Department’s Standard Occupa-
tional Classification (soc). The o∗net data was initially collected from 
labour market analysts, and has since been regularly updated by surveys
of each occupation’s worker population and related experts, to provide
up-to-date information on occupations as they evolve over time. For our
purposes, an important feature of o∗net is that it defines the key features 
of an occupation as a standardised and measurable set of variables, but
also provides open-ended descriptions of specific tasks to each occupation. 
This allows us to: (a) objectively rank occupations according to the mix of
knowledge, skills, and abilities they require; and (b) subjectively categorise 
them based on the variety of tasks they involve.

The close soc correspondence of o∗net allows us to link occupational 
characteristics to 2010 Bureau of Labor Statistics (bls) employment and
wage data. While the o∗net occupational classification is somewhat more 
detailed, distinguishing between Auditors and Accountants, for example,
we aggregate these occupations to correspond to the six-digit 2010 soc 
system, for which employment and wage figures are reported. To obtain
unique o∗net variables corresponding to the six-digit soc classification, 
we used the mean of the o∗net aggregate. In addition, we exclude any
six-digit soc occupations for which o∗net data was missing.20 Doing so, 
we end up with a final dataset consisting of 702 occupations.

To assess the employment impact of the described technological devel-

20The missing occupations consist of “All Other” titles, representing occupations with
a wide range of characteristics which do not fit into one of the detailed o∗net-soc
occupations. o∗net data is not available for this type of title. We note that us
employment for the 702 occupations we considered is 138.44 million. Hence our analysis
excluded 4.628 million jobs, equivalent to 3 percent of total employment.

31



opments in ml, the ideal experiment would provide two identical autarkic

economies, one facing the expanding technological capabilities we observe,

and a secular decline in the price of computerisation, and the other not.

By comparison, it would be straightforward to examine how computerisa-

tion reshapes the occupational composition of the labour market. In the

absence of this experiment, the second preferred option would be to build

on the implementation strategy of Autor, et al. (2003), and test a simple

economic model to predict how demand for workplace tasks responds to

developments in ml and mr technology. However, because our paper is

forward-looking, in the sense that most of the described technological de-

velopments are yet to be implemented across industries on a broader scale,

this option was not available for our purposes.

Instead, our implementation strategy builds on the literature examining

the offshoring of information-based tasks to foreign worksites, consisting

of different methodologies to rank and categorise occupations according to

their susceptibility to offshoring (Blinder, 2009; Jensen and Kletzer, 2005,

2010). The common denominator for these studies is that they rely on

o∗net data in different ways. While Blinder (2009) eyeballed the o∗net
data on each occupation, paying particular attention to the job description,

tasks, and work activities, to assign an admittedly subjective two-digit in-

dex number of offshorability to each occupation, Jensen and Kletzer (2005)

created a purely objective ranking based on standardised and measurable

o∗net variables. Both approaches have obvious drawbacks. Subjective
judgments are often not replicable and may result in the researcher sub-

consciously rigging the data to conform to a certain set of beliefs. Objective

rankings, on the other hand, are not subject to such drawbacks, but are

constrained by the reliability of the variables that are being used. At this

stage, it shall be noted that o∗net data was not gathered to specifically
measure the offshorability or automatability of jobs. Accordingly, Blinder

(2009) finds that past attempts to create objective offshorability rankings

using o∗net data have yielded some questionable results, ranking lawyers
and judges among the most tradable occupations, while classifying occu-

pations such as data entry keyers, telephone operators, and billing clerks

as virtually impossible to move offshore.

To work around some of these drawbacks, we combine and build upon

32



the two described approaches. First, together with a group of ml re-

searchers, we subjectively hand-labelled 70 occupations, assigning 1 if au-

tomatable, and 0 if not. For our subjective assessments, we draw upon

a workshop held at the Oxford University Engineering Sciences Depart-

ment, examining the automatability of a wide range of tasks. Our label

assignments were based on eyeballing the o∗net tasks and job description
of each occupation. This information is particular to each occupation, as

opposed to standardised across different jobs. The hand-labelling of the

occupations was made by answering the question “Can the tasks of this job

be sufficiently specified, conditional on the availability of big data, to be

performed by state of the art computer-controlled equipment”. Thus, we

only assigned a 1 to fully automatable occupations, where we considered

all tasks to be automatable. To the best of our knowledge, we consid-

ered the possibility of task simplification, possibly allowing some currently

non-automatable tasks to be automated. Labels were assigned only to the

occupations about which we were most confident.

Second, we use objective o∗net variables corresponding to the defined
bottlenecks to computerisation. More specifically, we are interested in

variables describing the level of perception and manipulation, creativity,

and social intelligence required to perform it. As reported in Table 1,

we identified nine variables that describe these attributes. These variables

were derived from the o∗net survey, where the respondents are given mul-
tiple scales, with “importance” and “level” as the predominant pair. We

rely on the “level” rating which corresponds to specific examples about

the capabilities required of computer-controlled equipment to perform the

tasks of an occupation. For instance, in relation to the attribute “Man-

ual Dexterity”, low (level) corresponds to “Screw a light bulb into a light

socket”; medium (level) is exemplified by “Pack oranges in crates as quickly

as possible”; high (level) is described as “Perform open-heart surgery with

surgical instruments”. This gives us an indication of the level of “Man-

ual Dexterity” computer-controlled equipment would require to perform a

specific occupation. An exception is the “Cramped work space” variable,

which measures the frequency of unstructured work.

Hence, in short, by hand-labelling occupations, we work around the

issue that o∗net data was not gathered to specifically measure the au-

33



Table 1. o∗net variables that serve as indicators of bottlenecks to computerisation

Computerisation
bottleneck

o∗net Variable o∗net Description

Perception
and
Manipulation

Finger
Dexterity

The ability to make precisely coordinated move-
ments of the fingers of one or both hands to grasp,
manipulate, or assemble very small objects.

Manual
Dexterity

The ability to quickly move your hand, your hand
together with your arm, or your two hands to
grasp, manipulate, or assemble objects.

Cramped Work Space,
Awkward Positions

How often does this job require working in
cramped work spaces that requires getting into
awkward positions?

Creative
Intelligence

Originality The ability to come up with unusual or clever ideas
about a given topic or situation, or to develop cre-
ative ways to solve a problem.

Fine Arts Knowledge of theory and techniques required to
compose, produce, and perform works of music,
dance, visual arts, drama, and sculpture.

Social
Intelligence

Social
Perceptiveness

Being aware of others’ reactions and understand-
ing why they react as they do.

Negotiation Bringing others together and trying to reconcile
differences.

Persuasion Persuading others to change their minds or
behavior.

Assisting and Caring
for Others

Providing personal assistance, medical attention,
emotional support, or other personal care to others
such as coworkers, customers, or patients.

tomatability of jobs in a similar manner to Blinder (2009). In addition, 
we mitigate some of the subjective biases held by the researchers by using
objective o∗net variables to correct potential hand-labelling errors. The
fact that we label only 70 of the full 702 occupations, selecting those occu-
pations whose computerisation label we are highly confident about, further 
reduces the risk of subjective bias affecting our analysis. To develop an 
algorithm appropriate for this task, we turn to probabilistic classification.

4.2 Classification method

We begin by examining the accuracy of our subjective assessments of the 
automatability of 702 occupations. For classification, we develop an algo-
rithm to provide the label probability given a previously unseen vector of
variables. In the terminology of classification, the o∗net variables form a

34



feature vector, denoted x ∈ R9. o∗net hence supplies a complete dataset
of 702 such feature vectors. A computerisable label is termed a class,

denoted y ∈ {0, 1}. For our problem, y = 1 (true) implies that we hand-
labelled as computerisable the occupation described by the associated nine

o∗net variables contained in x ∈ R9. Our training data is D = (X, y),
where X ∈ R70×9 is a matrix of variables and y ∈ {0, 1}70 gives the as-
sociated labels. This dataset contains information about how y varies as

a function of x: as a hypothetical example, it may be the case that, for

all occupations for which x1 > 50, y = 1. A probabilistic classification

algorithm exploits patterns existent in training data to return the proba-

bility P (y∗ = 1 | x∗, X, y) of a new, unlabelled, test datum with features
x
∗

having class label y∗ = 1.

We achieve probabilistic classification by introducing a latent function

f : x 7→ R, known as a discriminant function. Given the value of the
discriminant f∗ at a test point x∗, we assume that the probability for the

class label is given by the logistic

(3) P (y∗ = 1 | f∗) =
1

1 + exp(−f∗)
,

and P (y∗ = 0 | f∗) = 1 − P (y∗ = 1 | f∗). For f∗ > 0, y∗ = 1 is
more probable than y∗ = 0. For our application, f can be thought of

as a continuous-valued ‘automatability’ variable: the higher its value, the

higher the probability of computerisation.

We test three different models for the discriminant function, f , using

the best performing for our further analysis. Firstly, logistic (or logit)

regression, which adopts a linear model for f , f(x) = w⊺x, where the

un-known weights w are often inferred by maximising their probability

in light of the training data. This simple model necessarily implies a

simple monotonic relationship between features and the probability of the

class taking a particular value. Richer models are provided by Gaussian

process classifiers (Rasmussen and Williams, 2006). Such classifiers model

the latent function f with a Gaussian process (gp): a non-parametric

probability distribution over functions.

A gp is defined as a distribution over the functions f : X → R such
that the distribution over the possible function values on any finite subset

35



of X (such as X) is multivariate Gaussian. For a function f(x), the prior
distribution over its values f on a subset x ⊂ X are completely specified
by a covariance matrix K

p(f | K) = N (f ; 0, K) = 1√
det 2πK

exp
(

− 1
2
f⊺ K−1 f

)

.(4)

The covariance matrix is generated by a covariance function κ : X ×X 7→
R; that is, K = κ(X,X). The gp model is expressed by the choice of κ;

we consider the exponentiated quadratic (squared exponential) and rational

quadratic. Note that we have chosen a zero mean function, encoding the

assumption that P (y∗ = 1) =
1

2
sufficiently far from training data.

Given training data D, we use the gp to make predictions about the
function values f∗ at input x∗. With this information, we have the predic-

tive equations

p(f∗ | x∗,D) = N
(

f∗;m(f∗ | x∗,D), V (f∗ | x∗,D)
)

,(5)

where

m(f∗ | x∗,D) = K(x∗, X)K(X,X)−1y(6)
V (f∗ | x∗,D) = K(x∗, x∗)−K(x∗, X)K(X,X)−1K(X, x∗) .(7)

Inferring the label posterior p(y∗ | x∗,D) is complicated by the non-
Gaussian form of the logistic (3). In order to effect inference, we use

the approximate Expectation Propagation algorithm (Minka, 2001).

We tested three Gaussian process classifiers using the gpml toolbox

(Rasmussen and Nickisch, 2010) on our data, built around exponentiated

quadratic, rational quadratic and linear covariances. Note that the lat-

ter is equivalent to logistic regression with a Gaussian prior taken on the

weights w. To validate these classifiers, we randomly selected a reduced

training set of half the available data D; the remaining data formed a test
set. On this test set, we evaluated how closely the algorithm’s classifica-

tions matched the hand labels according to two metrics (see e.g. Mur-

phy (2012)): the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve

(auc), which is equal to one for a perfect classifier, and one half for a

36



Table 2. Performance of various classifiers; best performances in bold

classifier model auc log-likelihood

exponentiated quadratic 0.894 −163.3
rational quadratic 0.893 −163.7
linear (logit regression) 0.827 −205.0

completely random classifier, and the log-likelihood, which should ideally

be high. This experiment was repeated for one hundred random selec-

tions of training set, and the average results tabulated in Table 2. The

exponentiated quadratic model returns (narrowly) the best performance

of the three (clearly outperforming the linear model corresponding to lo-

gistic regression), and was hence selected for the remainder of our testing.

Note that its auc score of nearly 0.9 represents accurate classification:

our algorithm successfully managed to reproduce our hand-labels speci-

fying whether an occupation was computerisable. This means that our

algorithm verified that our subjective judgements were systematically and

consistently related to the o∗net variables.
Having validated our approach, we proceed to use classification to pre-

dict the probability of computerisation for all 702 occupations. For this

purpose, we introduce a new label variable, z, denoting whether an occu-

pation is truly computerisable or not: note that this can be judged only

once an occupation is computerised, at some indeterminate point in the

future. We take, again, a logistic likelihood,

(8) P (z∗ = 1 | f∗) =
1

1 + exp(−f∗)
.

We implicitly assumed that our hand label, y, is a noise-corrupted version

of the unknown true label, z. Our motivation is that our hand-labels of

computerisability must necessarily be treated as such noisy measurements.

We thus acknowledge that it is by no means certain that a job is computer-

isable given our labelling. We define X∗ ∈ R702×9 as the matrix of o∗net
variables for all 702 occupations; this matrix represents our test features.

We perform a final experiment in which, given training data D, con-
sisting of our 70 hand-labelled occupations, we aim to predict z

∗
for our

37



Probability of
Computerisation

C
ra

m
p
ed

w
or

k
sp

ac
e

Probability of
Computerisation

F
in

ge
r

de
xt

er
it
y

Probability of
Computerisation

M
an

ua
l
de

xt
er

it
y

Probability of
Computerisation

O
ri

gi
na

lit
y

Probability of
Computerisation

F
in

e
ar

ts

Probability of
Computerisation

So
ci

al
p
er

ce
pt

iv
en

es
s

Probability of
Computerisation

N
eg

ot
ia

ti
on

Probability of
Computerisation

P
er

su
as

io
n

Probability of
Computerisation

A
ss

is
ti
ng

an
d

ca
ri

ng
fo

r
ot

he
rs

0 0.5 10 0.5 10 0.5 1

0 0.5 10 0.5 10 0.5 1

0 0.5 10 0.5 10 0.5 1

0

50

100

0

20

40

60

80

0

20

40

60

80

0

20

40

60

80

0

50

100

0

50

100

0

20

40

60

80

0

20

40

60

80

0

50

100

Figure 2. The distribution of occupational variables as a function of probability of 
computerisation; each occupation is a unique point

38



test features X∗. This approach firstly allows us to use the features of 
the 70 occupations about which we are most certain to predict for the 
remaining 632. Further, our algorithm uses the trends and patterns it 
has learned from bulk data to correct for what are likely to be mistaken 
labels. More precisely, the algorithm provides a smoothly varying prob-
abilistic assessment of automatability as a function of the variables. For 
our Gaussian process classifier, this function is non-linear, meaning that it 
flexibly adapts to the patterns inherent in the training data. Our approach 
thus allows for more complex, non-linear, interactions between variables: 
for example, perhaps one variable is not of importance unless the value of
another variable is sufficiently large. We report P (z

∗ | X∗, D) as the prob-
ability of computerisation henceforth (for a detailed probability ranking,
see Appendix). Figure 2 illustrates that this probability is non-linearly
related to the nine o∗net variables selected.

5 Employment in the twenty-first century

In this section, we examine the possible future extent of at-risk job comput-
erisation, and related labour market outcomes. The task model predicts 
that recent developments in ml will reduce aggregate demand for labour 
input in tasks that can be routinised by means of pattern recognition, while 
increasing the demand for labour performing tasks that are not suscepti-
ble to computerisation. However, we make no attempt to forecast future 
changes in the occupational composition of the labour market. While the 
2010-2020 bls occupational employment projections predict us net em-
ployment growth across major occupations, based on historical staffing 
patterns, we speculate about technology that is in only the early stages of 
development. This means that historical data on the impact of the tech-
nological developments we observe is unavailable.21 We therefore focus on 
the impact of computerisation on the mix of jobs that existed in 2010. Our 
analysis is thus limited to the substitution effect of future computerisation. 

Turning first to the expected employment impact, reported in Figure

21It shall be noted that the bls projections are based on what can be referred to as
changes in normal technological progress, and not on any breakthrough technologies
that may be seen as conjectural.

39



Transportation and Material Moving
Production
Installation, Maintenance, and Repair
Construction and Extraction
Farming, Fishing, and Forestry
Office and Administrative Support
Sales and Related
Service
Healthcare Practitioners and Technical
Education, Legal, Community Service, Arts, and Media
Computer, Engineering, and Science
Management, Business, and Financial

E
m

pl
oy

m
en

t

Probability of Computerisation

47% Employment
←−−− High −−−→

19% Employment
←−−− Medium −−−→

33% Employment
←−−− Low −−−→

0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1

0M

100M

200M

300M

400M

Figure 3. The distribution of bls 2010 occupational employment over the
probability of computerisation, along with the share in low, medium and high

probability categories. Note that the total area under all curves is equal to total us
employment.

40



3, we distinguish between high, medium and low risk occupations, depend-

ing on their probability of computerisation (thresholding at probabilities

of 0.7 and 0.3). According to our estimate, 47 percent of total us employ-

ment is in the high risk category, meaning that associated occupations are

potentially automatable over some unspecified number of years, perhaps

a decade or two. It shall be noted that the probability axis can be seen

as a rough timeline, where high probability occupations are likely to be

substituted by computer capital relatively soon. Over the next decades,

the extent of computerisation will be determined by the pace at which the

above described engineering bottlenecks to automation can be overcome.

Seen from this perspective, our findings could be interpreted as two waves

of computerisation, separated by a “technological plateau”. In the first

wave, we find that most workers in transportation and logistics occupa-

tions, together with the bulk of office and administrative support workers,

and labour in production occupations, are likely to be substituted by com-

puter capital. As computerised cars are already being developed and the

declining cost of sensors makes augmenting vehicles with advanced sensors

increasingly cost-effective, the automation of transportation and logistics

occupations is in line with the technological developments documented in

the literature. Furthermore, algorithms for big data are already rapidly

entering domains reliant upon storing or accessing information, making it

equally intuitive that office and administrative support occupations will

be subject to computerisation. The computerisation of production occu-

pations simply suggests a continuation of a trend that has been observed

over the past decades, with industrial robots taking on the routine tasks

of most operatives in manufacturing. As industrial robots are becoming

more advanced, with enhanced senses and dexterity, they will be able to

perform a wider scope of non-routine manual tasks. From a technological

capabilities point of view, the vast remainder of employment in production

occupations is thus likely to diminish over the next decades.

More surprising, at first sight, is that a substantial share of employment

in services, sales and construction occupations exhibit high probabilities

of computerisation. Yet these findings are largely in line with recent doc-

umented technological developments. First, the market for personal and

household service robots is already growing by about 20 percent annually

41



(MGI, 2013). As the comparative advantage of human labour in tasks in-

volving mobility and dexterity will diminish over time, the pace of labour

substitution in service occupations is likely to increase even further. Sec-

ond, while it seems counterintuitive that sales occupations, which are likely

to require a high degree of social intelligence, will be subject to a wave of

computerisation in the near future, high risk sales occupations include, for

example, cashiers, counter and rental clerks, and telemarketers. Although

these occupations involve interactive tasks, they do not necessarily require

a high degree of social intelligence. Our model thus seems to do well in dis-

tinguishing between individual occupations within occupational categories.

Third, prefabrication will allow a growing share of construction work to

be performed under controlled conditions in factories, which partly elimi-

nates task variability. This trend is likely to drive the computerisation of

construction work.

In short, our findings suggest that recent developments in ml will put

a substantial share of employment, across a wide range of occupations, at

risk in the near future. According to our estimates, however, this wave of

automation will be followed by a subsequent slowdown in computers for

labour substitution, due to persisting inhibiting engineering bottlenecks to

computerisation. The relatively slow pace of computerisation across the

medium risk category of employment can thus partly be interpreted as a

technological plateau, with incremental technological improvements suc-

cessively enabling further labour substitution. More specifically, the com-

puterisation of occupations in the medium risk category will mainly depend

on perception and manipulation challenges. This is evident from Table

III, showing that the “manual dexterity”, “finger dexterity” and “cramped

work space” variables exhibit relatively high values in the medium risk

category. Indeed, even with recent technological developments, allowing

for more sophisticated pattern recognition, human labour will still have

a comparative advantage in tasks requiring more complex perception and

manipulation. Yet with incremental technological improvements, the com-

parative advantage of human labour in perception and manipulation tasks

could eventually diminish. This will require innovative task restructuring,

improvements in ml approaches to perception challenges, and progress in

robotic dexterity to overcome manipulation problems related to variation

42



Table 3. Distribution (mean and standard deviation) of values for each variable

Variable Probability of Computerisation

Low Medium High

Assisting and caring for others 48±20 41±17 34±10
Persuasion 48±7.1 35±9.8 32±7.8
Negotiation 44±7.6 33±9.3 30±8.9
Social perceptiveness 51±7.9 41±7.4 37±5.5
Fine arts 12±20 3.5±12 1.3±5.5
Originality 51±6.5 35±12 32±5.6
Manual dexterity 22±18 34±15 36±14
Finger dexterity 36±10 39±10 40±10
Cramped work space 19±15 37±26 31±20

between task iterations and the handling of irregular objects. The grad-

ual computerisation of installation, maintenance, and repair occupations,

which are largely confined to the medium risk category, and require a high

degree of perception and manipulation capabilities, is a manifestation of

this observation.

Our model predicts that the second wave of computerisation will mainly

depend on overcoming the engineering bottlenecks related to creative and

social intelligence. As reported in Table 3, the “fine arts”, “originality”,

“negotiation”, “persuasion”, “social perceptiveness”, and “assisting and car-

ing for others”, variables, all exhibit relatively high values in the low risk

category. By contrast, we note that the “manual dexterity”, “finger dexter-

ity” and “cramped work space” variables take relatively low values. Hence,

in short, generalist occupations requiring knowledge of human heuristics,

and specialist occupations involving the development of novel ideas and

artifacts, are the least susceptible to computerisation. As a prototypical

example of generalist work requiring a high degree of social intelligence,

consider the o∗net tasks reported for chief executives, involving “con-
ferring with board members, organization officials, or staff members to

discuss issues, coordinate activities, or resolve problems”, and “negotiating

or approving contracts or agreements.” Our predictions are thus intuitive

in that most management, business, and finance occupations, which are

intensive in generalist tasks requiring social intelligence, are largely con-

43



fined to the low risk category. The same is true of most occupations in

education, healthcare, as well as arts and media jobs. The o∗net tasks
of actors, for example, involve “performing humorous and serious interpre-

tations of emotions, actions, and situations, using body movements, facial

expressions, and gestures”, and “learning about characters in scripts and

their relationships to each other in order to develop role interpretations.”

While these tasks are very different from those of a chief executive, they

equally require profound knowledge of human heuristics, implying that a

wide range of tasks, involving social intelligence, are unlikely to become

subject to computerisation in the near future.

The low susceptibility of engineering and science occupations to com-

puterisation, on the other hand, is largely due to the high degree of creative

intelligence they require. The o∗net tasks of mathematicians, for ex-
ample, involve “developing new principles and new relationships between

existing mathematical principles to advance mathematical science” and

“conducting research to extend mathematical knowledge in traditional ar-

eas, such as algebra, geometry, probability, and logic.” Hence, while it is

evident that computers are entering the domains of science and engineer-

ing, our predictions implicitly suggest strong complementarities between

computers and labour in creative science and engineering occupations; al-

though it is possible that computers will fully substitute for workers in

these occupations over the long-run. We note that the predictions of our

model are strikingly in line with the technological trends we observe in the

automation of knowledge work, even within occupational categories. For

example, we find that paralegals and legal assistants – for which computers

already substitute – in the high risk category. At the same time, lawyers,

which rely on labour input from legal assistants, are in the low risk cat-

egory. Thus, for the work of lawyers to be fully automated, engineering

bottlenecks to creative and social intelligence will need to be overcome,

implying that the computerisation of legal research will complement the

work of lawyers in the medium term.

To complete the picture of what recent technological progress is likely

to mean for the future of employment, we plot the average median wage of

occupations by their probability of computerisation. We do the same for

skill level, measured by the fraction of workers having obtained a bachelor’s

44



A
ve

ra
ge

m
ed

ia
n

w
ag

e
(u

s
d
)

Probability of Computerisation

0 0.5 1

20k

40k

60k

80k  

unweighted

average
weighted by
employment

B
ac

he
lo

r’
s

de
gr

ee
or

b
et

te
r

Probability of Computerisation

0 0.5 1

0%

20%

40%

60%

Figure 4. Wage and education level as a function of the probability of 
computerisation; note that both plots share a legend.

degree, or higher educational attainment, within each occupation. Figure 
4 reveals that both wages and educational attainment exhibit a strong neg-
ative relationship with the probability of computerisation. We note that 
this prediction implies a truncation in the current trend towards labour 
market polarization, with growing employment in high and low-wage oc-
cupations, accompanied by a hollowing-out of middle-income jobs. Rather 
than reducing the demand for middle-income occupations, which has been 
the pattern over the past decades, our model predicts that computerisation 
will mainly substitute for low-skill and low-wage jobs in the near future. 
By contrast, high-skill and high-wage occupations are the least susceptible 
to computer capital.

Our findings were robust to the choice of the 70 occupations that formed 
our training data. This was confirmed by the experimental results tabu-
lated in Table 2: a gp classifier trained on half of the training data was 
demonstrably able to accurately predict the labels of the other half, over 
one hundred different partitions. That these predictions are accurate for 
many possible partitions of the training set suggests that slight modifica-
tions to this set are unlikely to lead to substantially different results on 
the entire dataset.

5.1 Limitations

It shall be noted that our predictions are based on expanding the premises 
about the tasks that computer-controlled equipment can be expected to

45



perform. Hence, we focus on estimating the share of employment that

can potentially be substituted by computer capital, from a technological

capabilities point of view, over some unspecified number of years. We make

no attempt to estimate how many jobs will actually be automated. The

actual extent and pace of computerisation will depend on several additional

factors which were left unaccounted for.

First, labour saving inventions may only be adopted if the access to

cheap labour is scarce or prices of capital are relatively high (Habakkuk,

1962).22 We do not account for future wage levels, capital prices or labour

shortages. While these factors will impact on the timeline of our predic-

tions, labour is the scarce factor, implying that in the long-run wage levels

will increase relative to capital prices, making computerisation increasingly

profitable (see, for example, Acemoglu, 2003).

Second, regulatory concerns and political activism may slow down the

process of computerisation. The states of California and Nevada are, for

example, currently in the process of making legislatory changes to allow

for driverless cars. Similar steps will be needed in other states, and in

relation to various technologies. The extent and pace of legislatory im-

plementation can furthermore be related to the public acceptance of tech-

nological progress.23 Although resistance to technological progress has

become seemingly less common since the Industrial Revolution, there are

recent examples of resistance to technological change.24 We avoid mak-

ing predictions about the legislatory process and the public acceptance of

22For example, case study evidence suggests that mechanisation in eighteenth century
cotton production initially only occurred in Britain because wage levels were much
higher relative to prices of capital than in other countries (Allen, 2009b). In addition,
recent empirical research reveals a causal relationship between the access to cheap
labour and mechanisation in agricultural production, in terms of sustained economic
transition towards increased mechanisation in areas characterised by low-wage worker
out-migration (Hornbeck and Naidu, 2013).

23For instance, William Huskisson, former cabinet minister and Member of Parlia-
ment for Liverpool, was killed by a steam locomotive during the opening of the Liverpool
and Manchester Railway. Nonetheless, this well-publicised incident did anything but
dissuade the public from railway transportation technology. By contrast, airship tech-
nology is widely recognised as having been popularly abandoned as a consequence of
the reporting of the Hindenburg disaster.

24Uber, a start-up company connecting passengers with drivers of luxury vehicles, has
recently faced pressure from from local regulators, arising from tensions with taxicab
services. Furthermore, in 2011 the uk Government scrapped a 12.7 billion gbp project
to introduce electronic patient records after resistance from doctors.

46



technological progress, and thus the pace of computerisation.
Third, making predictions about technological progress is notoriously 

difficult (Armstrong and Sotala, 2012).25 For this reason, we focus on near-
term technological breakthroughs in ml and mr, and avoid making any 
predictions about the number of years it may take to overcome various 
engineering bottlenecks to computerisation. Finally, we emphasise that 
since our probability estimates describe the likelihood of an occupation 
being fully automated, we do not capture any within-occupation variation 
resulting from the computerisation of tasks that simply free-up time for 
human labour to perform other tasks. Although it is clear that the im-
pact of productivity gains on employment will vary across occupations and 
industries, we make no attempt to examine such effects.

6 Conclusions

While computerisation has been historically confined to routine tasks in-
volving explicit rule-based activities (Autor, et al., 2003; Goos, et al., 2009; 
Autor and Dorn, 2013), algorithms for big data are now rapidly entering 
domains reliant upon pattern recognition and can readily substitute for 
labour in a wide range of non-routine cognitive tasks (Brynjolfsson and 
McAfee, 2011; MGI, 2013). In addition, advanced robots are gaining en-
hanced senses and dexterity, allowing them to perform a broader scope of 
manual tasks (IFR, 2012b; Robotics-VO, 2013; MGI, 2013). This is likely 
to change the nature of work across industries and occupations.

In this paper, we ask the question: how susceptible are current jobs to 
these technological developments? To assess this, we implement a novel 
methodology to estimate the probability of computerisation for 702 de-
tailed occupations. Based on these estimates, we examine expected im-
pacts of future computerisation on labour market outcomes, with the pri-
mary objective of analysing the number of jobs at risk and the relationship 
between an occupation’s probability of computerisation, wages and educa-
tional attainment.

25Marvin Minsky famously claimed in 1970 that “in from three to eight years we
will have a machine with the general intelligence of an average human being”. This
prediction is yet to materialise.

47



We distinguish between high, medium and low risk occupations, de-

pending on their probability of computerisation. We make no attempt to

estimate the number of jobs that will actually be automated, and focus

on potential job automatability over some unspecified number of years.

According to our estimates around 47 percent of total us employment is

in the high risk category. We refer to these as jobs at risk – i.e. jobs we

expect could be automated relatively soon, perhaps over the next decade

or two.

Our model predicts that most workers in transportation and logistics

occupations, together with the bulk of office and administrative support

workers, and labour in production occupations, are at risk. These find-

ings are consistent with recent technological developments documented in

the literature. More surprisingly, we find that a substantial share of em-

ployment in service occupations, where most us job growth has occurred

over the past decades (Autor and Dorn, 2013), are highly susceptible to

computerisation. Additional support for this finding is provided by the

recent growth in the market for service robots (MGI, 2013) and the gradu-

ally diminishment of the comparative advantage of human labour in tasks

involving mobility and dexterity (Robotics-VO, 2013).

Finally, we provide evidence that wages and educational attainment

exhibit a strong negative relationship with the probability of computer-

isation. We note that this finding implies a discontinuity between the

nineteenth, twentieth and the twenty-first century, in the impact of capi-

tal deepening on the relative demand for skilled labour. While nineteenth

century manufacturing technologies largely substituted for skilled labour

through the simplification of tasks (Braverman, 1974; Hounshell, 1985;

James and Skinner, 1985; Goldin and Katz, 1998), the Computer Revo-

lution of the twentieth century caused a hollowing-out of middle-income

jobs (Goos, et al., 2009; Autor and Dorn, 2013). Our model predicts a

truncation in the current trend towards labour market polarisation, with

computerisation being principally confined to low-skill and low-wage occu-

pations. Our findings thus imply that as technology races ahead, low-skill

workers will reallocate to tasks that are non-susceptible to computerisation

– i.e., tasks requiring creative and social intelligence. For workers to win

the race, however, they will have to acquire creative and social skills.

48



References

Acemoglu, D. (2002). Technical change, inequality, and the labor market.

Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 7–72.

Acemoglu, D. (2003). Labor- and capital-augmenting technical change.

Journal of the European Economic Association, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 1–37.

Acemoglu, D. and Autor, D. (2011). Skills, tasks and technologies: Im-

plications for employment and earnings. Handbook of labor economics,

vol. 4, pp. 1043–1171.

Acemoglu, D. and Robinson, J. (2012). Why nations fail: the origins of

power, prosperity, and poverty. Random House Digital, Inc.

Ackerman, E. and Guizzo, E. (2011). 5 technologies that will shape the

web. Spectrum, ieee, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 40–45.

Aghion, P. and Howitt, P. (1994). Growth and unemployment. The Review

of Economic Studies, vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 477–494.

Allen, R.C. (2009a). Engels’ pause: Technical change, capital accumula-

tion, and inequality in the british industrial revolution. Explorations in

Economic History, vol. 46, no. 4, pp. 418–435.

Allen, R.C. (2009b). The industrial revolution in miniature: The spinning

jenny in Britain, France, and India. The Journal of Economic History,

vol. 69, no. 04, pp. 901–927.

Allen, S.G. (2001). Technology and the wage structure. Journal of Labor

Economics, vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 440–483.

Armstrong, S. and Sotala, K. (2012). How we’re predicting ai – or failing

to. Tech. Rep., Oxford: Future of Humanity Institute, Oxford Univer-

sity.

Atack, J., Bateman, F. and Margo, R.A. (2004). Skill intensity and rising

wage dispersion in nineteenth-century American manufacturing. The

Journal of Economic History, vol. 64, no. 01, pp. 172–192.

49



Atack, J., Bateman, F. and Margo, R.A. (2008a). Steam power, establish-

ment size, and labor productivity growth in nineteenth century Amer-

ican manufacturing. Explorations in Economic History, vol. 45, no. 2,

pp. 185–198.

Atack, J., Haines, M.R. and Margo, R.A. (2008b). Railroads and the rise of

the factory: Evidence for the united states, 1850-70. Tech. Rep., nber

Working Paper No. 14410, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Atkinson, A.B. (2008). The changing distribution of earnings in OECD

countries. Oxford University Press.

Autor, D. and Dorn, D. (2013). The growth of low skill service jobs and

the polarization of the us labor market. American Economic Review,

vol. forthcoming.

Autor, D., Katz, L.F. and Krueger, A.B. (1998). Computing inequality:

have computers changed the labor market? The Quarterly Journal of

Economics, vol. 113, no. 4, pp. 1169–1213.

Autor, D., Levy, F. and Murnane, R.J. (2003). The skill content of recent

technological change: An empirical exploration. The Quarterly Journal

of Economics, vol. 118, no. 4, pp. 1279–1333.

Barlow, J. and Ozaki, R. (2005). Building mass customised housing

through innovation in the production system: lessons from Japan. En-

vironment and Planning A, vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 9–20.

Beaudry, P., Green, D.A. and Sand, B.M. (2013). The great reversal in the

demand for skill and cognitive tasks. Tech. Rep., nber Working Paper

No. 18901, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Beniger, J.R. (1986). The control revolution: Technological and economic

origins of the information society. Harvard University Press.

Blinder, A.S. (2009). How many us jobs might be offshorable? World

Economics, vol. 10, no. 2, p. 41.

50



Blinder, A.S. and Krueger, A.B. (2013). Alternative measures of offshora-

bility: a survey approach. Journal of Labor Economics, vol. 31, no. 2,

pp. S97–S128.

Bloss, R. (2011). Mobile hospital robots cure numerous logistic needs.

Industrial Robot: An International Journal, vol. 38, no. 6, pp. 567–571.

Boden, M.A. (2003). The creative mind: Myths and mechanisms. Rout-

ledge.

Braverman, H. (1974). Labor and monopoly capital: The degradation of

work in the twentieth century. NYU Press.

Breslow, L., Pritchard, D.E., DeBoer, J., Stump, G.S., Ho, A.D. and

Seaton, D. (2013). Studying learning in the worldwide classroom: Re-

search into edx’s first mooc. Research & Practice in Assessment, vol. 8,

pp. 13–25.

Bresnahan, T.F. (1999). Computerisation and wage dispersion: an ana-

lytical reinterpretation. The Economic Journal, vol. 109, no. 456, pp.

390–415.

Bresnahan, T.F., Brynjolfsson, E. and Hitt, L.M. (2002). Information

technology, workplace organization, and the demand for skilled labor:

Firm-level evidence. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 117,

no. 1, pp. 339–376.

Bright, J.R. (1958). Automation and management. Division of Re-

search, Graduate School of Business Administration, Harvard University

Boston.

Broekens, J., Heerink, M. and Rosendal, H. (2009). Assistive social robots

in elderly care: a review. Gerontechnology, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 94–103.

Brown, E., Rodenberg, N., Amend, J., Mozeika, A., Steltz, E., Zakin,

M.R., Lipson, H. and Jaeger, H.M. (2010). Universal robotic gripper

based on the jamming of granular material. Proceedings of the National

Academy of Sciences, vol. 107, no. 44, pp. 18809–18814.

51



Brown, M. and Philips, P. (1986). Craft labor and mechanization in

nineteenth-century American canning. The Journal of Economic His-

tory, vol. 46, no. 3, pp. 743–56.

Brynjolfsson, E. and McAfee, A. (2011). Race against the machine: How

the digital revolution is accelerating innovation, driving productivity, and

irreversibly transforming employment and the economy. Digital Frontier

Press Lexington, ma.

Campbell-Kelly, M. (2009). Origin of computing. Scientific American

Magazine, vol. 301, no. 3, pp. 62–69.

Chandler, A.D. (1977). The visible hand: The managerial revolution in

American business. Harvard University Press.

Charles, K.K., Hurst, E. and Notowidigdo, M.J. (2013). Manufacturing de-

cline, housing booms, and non-employment. Tech. Rep., nber Working

Paper No. 18949, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Churchill, W. and Newman, P. (2012). Practice makes perfect? managing

and leveraging visual experiences for lifelong navigation. In: Robotics

and Automation ( icra), 2012 ieee International Conference on, pp.

4525–4532. ieee.

Cisco (2012). Cisco visual networking index. http://www.cisco.com/en/

\us/netsol/ns827/networking_solutions_sub_solution.html.

Clark, G. (2008). A farewell to alms: a brief economic history of the world.

Princeton University Press.

Clifford, G.D. and Clifton, D. (2012). Wireless technology in disease man-

agement and medicine. Annual Review of Medicine, vol. 63, pp. 479–492.

Clifton, L., Clifton, D., Pimentel, M., Watkinson, P. and Tarassenko, L.

(2012). Gaussian processes for personalised e-health monitoring with

wearable sensors. ieee Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, vol. 60,

pp. 193–197.

Cohn, J. (2013 February 20). The robot will see you now. The Atlantic.

52



Cortada, J.W. (2000). Before the Computer: ibm, ncr, Burroughs, and

Remington Rand and the Industry They Created, 1865-1956. Princeton

University Press.

Danziger, S., Levav, J. and Avnaim-Pesso, L. (2011). Extraneous factors

in judicial decisions. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,

vol. 108, no. 17, pp. 6889–6892.

Davis, S.J. and Haltiwanger, J. (1992). Gross job creation, gross job de-

struction, and employment reallocation. The Quarterly Journal of Eco-

nomics, vol. 107, no. 3, pp. 819–863.

Duvenaud, D., Lloyd, J.R., Grosse, R., Tenenbaum, J.B. and Ghahramani,

Z. (2013). Structure discovery in nonparametric regression through com-

positional kernel search. In: Proceedings of the 30th International Con-

ference on Machine Learning, arXiv:1206.1846 [stat.ML]. Cambridge,

UK.

Epstein, S.R. (1998). Craft guilds, apprenticeship, and technological

change in preindustrial europe. Journal of Economic History, vol. 58,

pp. 684–713.

Feinstein, C.H. (1998). Pessimism perpetuated: real wages and the stan-

dard of living in Britain during and after the industrial revolution. The

Journal of Economic History, vol. 58, pp. 625–658.

Ge, S.S. (2007). Social robotics: Integrating advances in engineering and

computer science. In: The 4th annual international conference orga-

nized by Electrical Engineering/Electronics, Computer, Telecommunica-

tion and Information Technology (ecti) Association, Chiang Rai, Thai-

land, May 9â, vol. 12, p. 2007.

Goldin, C. and Katz, L.F. (1995). The decline of non-competing groups:

Changes in the premium to education, 1890 to 1940. Tech. Rep., nber

Working Paper No. 5202, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Goldin, C. and Katz, L.F. (1998). The origins of technology-skill com-

plementarity. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 113, no. 3, pp.

693–732.

53



Goldin, C. and Katz, L.F. (2009). The race between education and tech-

nology. Harvard University Press.

Goldin, C. and Sokoloff, K. (1982). Women, children, and industrialization

in the early republic: Evidence from the manufacturing censuses. The

Journal of Economic History, vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 741–774.

Goos, M. and Manning, A. (2007). Lousy and lovely jobs: The rising

polarization of work in Britain. The Review of Economics and Statistics,

vol. 89, no. 1, pp. 118–133.

Goos, M., Manning, A. and Salomons, A. (2009). Job polarization in

europe. The American Economic Review, vol. 99, no. 2, pp. 58–63.

Gordon, R.J. (2012). Is us economic growth over? faltering innovation

confronts the six headwinds. Tech. Rep., nber Working Paper No.

18315, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Gray, R. (2013). Taking technology to task: The skill content of techno-

logical change in early twentieth century united states. Explorations in

Economic History.

Guizzo, E. (2008 July 2). Three engineers, hundreds of robots,

one warehouse. ieee Spectrum. http://spectrum.ieee.org/robotics/

robotics-software/three-engineers-hundreds-of-robots-one-warehouse.

Guizzo, E. (2011 October 18). How google’s self-driving car works. ieee

Spectrum Online.

Habakkuk, H.J. (1962). American and British technology in the nineteenth

century: The search for labour-saving inventions. University Press.

Hangal, S. and Lam, M.S. (2002). Tracking down software bugs using

automatic anomaly detection. In: Proceedings of the 24th international

conference on Software engineering, pp. 291–301. acm.

Hanson, R. (2001). Economic growth given machine intelligence. Technical

Report, University of California, Berkeley.

54



Hoos, H.H. (2012). Programming by optimization. Communications of the

acm, vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 70–80.

Hornbeck, R. and Naidu, S. (2013). When the levee breaks: Labor mo-

bility and economic development in the American south. The American

Economic Review, vol. forthcoming.

Hounshell, D. (1985). From the American system to mass production,

1800-1932: The development of manufacturing technology in the United

States, vol. 4. jhu Press.

Jaimovich, N. and Siu, H.E. (2012). The trend is the cycle: Job polariza-

tion and jobless recoveries. Tech. Rep., nber Working Paper No. 18334,

National Bureau of Economic Research.

James, J.A. and Skinner, J.S. (1985). The resolution of the labor-scarcity

paradox. The Journal of Economic History, vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 513–540.

Jensen, J.B. and Kletzer, L.G. (2005). Tradable services: Understanding

the scope and impact of services offshoring [with comments and discus-

sion]. In: Brookings trade forum, pp. 75–133. jstor.

Jensen, J.B. and Kletzer, L.G. (2010). Measuring tradable services and the

task content of offshorable services jobs. In: Labor in the new economy,

pp. 309–335. University of Chicago Press.

Kahneman, D., Slovic, P. and Tversky, A. (1982). Judgment under uncer-

tainty. Cambridge University Press.

Katz, L.F. and Margo, R.A. (2013). Technical change and the relative

demand for skilled labor: The united states in historical perspective.

Tech. Rep., nber Working Paper No. 18752, National Bureau of Eco-

nomic Research.

Katz, L.F. and Murphy, K.M. (1992). Changes in relative wages, 1963–

1987: supply and demand factors. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,

vol. 107, no. 1, pp. 35–78.

55



Kellenbenz, H. (1974). Technology in the age of the scientific revolution,

1500-1700. The Fontana Economic History of Europe, vol. 2, pp. 177–

272.

Keynes, J.M. (1933). Economic possibilities for our grandchildren (1930).

Essays in persuasion, pp. 358–73.

Kim, S., Whitehead, E.J. and Zhang, Y. (2008). Classifying software

changes: Clean or buggy? Software Engineering, ieee Transactions on,

vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 181–196.

King, S., Bannister, P., Clifton, D. and Tarassenko, L. (2009). Probabilistic

approach to the condition monitoring of aerospace engines. Proceedings

of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part G: Journal of Aerospace

Engineering, vol. 223, no. 5, pp. 533–541.

Krueger, A.B. (1993). How computers have changed the wage structure:

evidence from microdata, 1984–1989. The Quarterly Journal of Eco-

nomics, vol. 108, no. 1, pp. 33–60.

Levy, F. and Murnane, R.J. (2004). The new division of labor: How com-

puters are creating the next job market. Princeton University Press.

Lindert, P.H. and Williamson, J.G. (1983). Reinterpreting Britain’s social

tables, 1688–1913. Explorations in Economic History, vol. 20, no. 1, pp.

94–109.

Linner, T. and Bock, T. (2012). Evolution of large-scale industrialisation

and service innovation in Japanese prefabrication industry. Construction

Innovation: Information, Process, Management, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 156–

178.

Livshits, B. and Zimmermann, T. (2005). Dynamine: finding common

error patterns by mining software revision histories. In: acm sigsoft

Software Engineering Notes, vol. 30, pp. 296–305. acm.

Louis, P. and Paterson, G. (1986). Biased technical change, scale, and

factor substitution in American industry, 1850-1919. The Journal of

Economic History, vol. 46, no. 1.

56



Lucas, R.E. and Prescott, E.C. (1974). Equilibrium search and unemploy-

ment. Journal of Economic Theory, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 188–209.

CAA (2012). Roadside assistance customers benefit from smart support

during peak and after hours. Tech. Rep., SmartAction case study of

Canadian Automobile Association Saskatchewan.

IFR (2012a). 68 robots perform farmer’s work. Tech. Rep., Case study

of Fanuc Robotics Europe S.A., International Federation of Robotics,

September 2012.

IFR (2012b August 30). World robotics 2012. Tech. Rep., International

Federation of Robotics.

MGI (2011). An economy that works: Job creation and America’s future.

Tech. Rep., McKinsey Global Institute.

MGI (2013). Disruptive technologies: Advances that will transform life,

business, and the global economy. Tech. Rep., McKinsey Global Insti-

tute.

Mantoux, P. (2006). The industrial revolution in the eighteenth century:

An outline of the beginnings of the modern factory system in England.

Taylor & Francis us.

Margo, R.A. (2000). Introduction to wages and labor markets in the United

States, 1820-1860. In: Wages and Labor Markets in the United States,

1820-1860, pp. 1–5. University of Chicago Press.

Markoff, J. (2011 March 4). Armies of expensive lawyers replaced by

cheaper software. The New York Times.

Markoff, J. (2012 August 18). Skilled work, without the worker. The New

York Times.

Mathibela, B., Osborne, M.A., Posner, I. and Newman, P. (2012). Can

priors be trusted? learning to anticipate roadworks. In: Intelligent

Transportation Systems (ITSC), 2012 15th International ieee Confer-

ence on, pp. 927–932. ieee.

57



Michaels, G., Rauch, F. and Redding, S.J. (2013). Task specialization in

us cities from 1880-2000. Tech. Rep., nber Working Paper No. 18715,

National Bureau of Economic Research.

Mims, C. (2010 June 10). ai that picks stocks better than the pros. mit

Technology Review.

Minka, T.P. (2001). Expectation propagation for approximate Bayesian

inference. In: Proceedings of the Seventeenth conference on Uncertainty

in artificial intelligence, pp. 362–369. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.

Mokyr, J. (1990). The lever of riches: Technological creativity and eco-

nomic progress. Oxford University Press.

Mokyr, J. (1998). The political economy of technological change. Techno-

logical revolutions in Europe, pp. 39–64.

Murphy, K.M., Riddell, W.C. and Romer, P.M. (1998). Wages, skills, and

technology in the united states and canada. Tech. Rep., nber Working

Paper No. 6638, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Murphy, K.P. (2012). Machine learning: a probabilistic perspective. The

mit Press.

Nef, J.U. (1957). Coal mining and utilization. A history of technology,

vol. 3, pp. 72–88.

Nordhaus, W.D. (2007). Two centuries of productivity growth in comput-

ing. The Journal of Economic History, vol. 67, no. 1, p. 128.

North, D.C. and Weingast, B.R. (1989). Constitutions and commitment:

the evolution of institutions governing public choice in seventeenth-

century england. The Journal of Economic History, vol. 49, no. 04,

pp. 803–832.

Ogilvie, S. (2004). Guilds, efficiency, and social capital: evidence from

German proto-industry. The Economic History Review, vol. 57, no. 2,

pp. 286–333.

58



Oldenski, L. (2012). Offshoring and the polarization of the us labor mar-

ket. Tech. Rep., Technical report, Mimeo, Georgetown University.

Osborne, M.A., Garnett, R., Swersky, K. and de Freitas, N. (2012). Predic-

tion and fault detection of environmental signals with uncharacterised

faults. In: Twenty-Sixth aaai Conference on Artificial Intelligence

(aaai-12).

Phua, C., Lee, V., Smith, K. and Gayler, R. (2010). A comprehensive

survey of data mining-based fraud detection research. arXiv preprint

arXiv:1009.6119.

Picard, R.W. (2010). Affective computing: from laughter to ieee. Affective

Computing, ieee Transactions on, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 11–17.

Pissarides, C.A. (2000). Equilibrium unemployment theory. mit press.

Plötz, T. and Fink, G.A. (2009). Markov models for offline handwriting

recognition: a survey. International Journal on Document Analysis and

Recognition (IJDAR), vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 269–298.

Rasmussen, C.E. and Nickisch, H. (2010). Gaussian processes for machine

learning (gpml) toolbox. The Journal of Machine Learning Research,

vol. 11, pp. 3011–3015.

Rasmussen, C.E. and Williams, C.K.I. (2006). Gaussian Processes for

Machine Learning. mit Press.

Ricardo, D. (1819). The principles of political economy and taxation. World

Scientific.

Robotics-VO (2013). A Roadmap for us Robotics. From Internet to

Robotics. 2013 Edition. Robotics in the United States of America.

Roy, A.D. (1951). Some thoughts on the distribution of earnings. Oxford

Economic Papers, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 135–146.

Saha, B., Goebel, K., Poll, S. and Christophersen, J. (2007). An integrated

approach to battery health monitoring using Bayesian regression and

state estimation. In: Autotestcon, 2007 ieee, pp. 646–653. ieee.

59



Sandberg, A. and Bostrom, N. (2008). Whole brain emulation: A roadmap,

technical report 2008-3. Tech. Rep., Future of Humanity Institute, Ox-

ford University.

Scherer, K.R., Bänziger, T. and Roesch, E.B. (2010). Blueprint for Affec-

tive Computing: A Sourcebook and Manual. Oxford University Press.

Schumpeter, J.A. (1962). Capitalism, socialism and democracy. Harper &

Row New York.

Simonite, T. (2013 June 5). As data floods in, massive open online courses

evolve. mit Technology Review. http://www.technologyreview.com/

news/515396/as-data-floods-in-massive-open-online-courses-evolve.

Tanner, A. (2007 March 27). Google seeks world of instant

translations. Reuters. http://www.reuters.com/article/2007/03/28/

us-google-translate-id\usN1921881520070328.

uc Berkeley School of Information (2003). How much inform-

ation? 2003. http://www2.sims.berkeley.edu/research/projects/

how-much-info-2003.

us Department of Labor (1899). Thirteenth Annual Report of the Commis-

sioner of Labor. Two Volumes, Government Printing Office, Washington,

dc.

Veres, S.M., Molnar, L., Lincoln, N.K. and Morice, C.P. (2011). Au-

tonomous vehicle control systems – a review of decision making. Pro-

ceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part I: Journal of

Systems and Control Engineering, vol. 225, no. 2, pp. 155–195.

Williamson, J.G. and Lindert, P.H. (1980). American inequality: A

macroeconomic history, vol. 53. Academic Press New York.

Woolf, B.P. (2010). Building intelligent interactive tutors: Student-

centered strategies for revolutionizing e-learning. Morgan Kaufmann.

60



Appendix

The table below ranks occupations according to their probability of com-
puterisation (from least- to most-computerisable). Those occupations used 
as training data are labelled as either ‘0’ (not computerisable) or ‘1’ (com-
puterisable), respectively. There are 70 such occupations, 10 percent of 
the total number of occupations.

Computerisable

Rank Probability Label soc code Occupation

1. 0.0028 29-1125 Recreational Therapists

2. 0.003 49-1011 First-Line Supervisors of Mechanics, Installers, and Repairers

3. 0.003 11-9161 Emergency Management Directors

4. 0.0031 21-1023 Mental Health and Substance Abuse Social Workers

5. 0.0033 29-1181 Audiologists

6. 0.0035 29-1122 Occupational Therapists

7. 0.0035 29-2091 Orthotists and Prosthetists

8. 0.0035 21-1022 Healthcare Social Workers

9. 0.0036 29-1022 Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons

10. 0.0036 33-1021 First-Line Supervisors of Fire Fighting and Prevention Work-

ers

11. 0.0039 29-1031 Dietitians and Nutritionists

12. 0.0039 11-9081 Lodging Managers

13. 0.004 27-2032 Choreographers

14. 0.0041 41-9031 Sales Engineers

15. 0.0042 0 29-1060 Physicians and Surgeons

16. 0.0042 25-9031 Instructional Coordinators

17. 0.0043 19-3039 Psychologists, All Other

18. 0.0044 33-1012 First-Line Supervisors of Police and Detectives

19. 0.0044 0 29-1021 Dentists, General

20. 0.0044 25-2021 Elementary School Teachers, Except Special Education

21. 0.0045 19-1042 Medical Scientists, Except Epidemiologists

22. 0.0046 11-9032 Education Administrators, Elementary and Secondary School

23. 0.0046 29-1081 Podiatrists

24. 0.0047 19-3031 Clinical, Counseling, and School Psychologists

25. 0.0048 21-1014 Mental Health Counselors

26. 0.0049 51-6092 Fabric and Apparel Patternmakers

27. 0.0055 27-1027 Set and Exhibit Designers

28. 0.0055 11-3121 Human Resources Managers

29. 0.0061 39-9032 Recreation Workers

30. 0.0063 11-3131 Training and Development Managers

31. 0.0064 29-1127 Speech-Language Pathologists

32. 0.0065 15-1121 Computer Systems Analysts

33. 0.0067 0 11-9151 Social and Community Service Managers

34. 0.0068 25-4012 Curators

35. 0.0071 29-9091 Athletic Trainers

36. 0.0073 11-9111 Medical and Health Services Managers

37. 0.0074 0 25-2011 Preschool Teachers, Except Special Education

61



Computerisable

Rank Probability Label soc code Occupation

38. 0.0075 25-9021 Farm and Home Management Advisors

39. 0.0077 19-3091 Anthropologists and Archeologists

40. 0.0077 25-2054 Special Education Teachers, Secondary School

41. 0.0078 25-2031 Secondary School Teachers, Except Special and Ca-

reer/Technical Education

42. 0.0081 0 21-2011 Clergy

43. 0.0081 19-1032 Foresters

44. 0.0085 21-1012 Educational, Guidance, School, and Vocational Counselors

45. 0.0088 25-2032 Career/Technical Education Teachers, Secondary School

46. 0.009 0 29-1111 Registered Nurses

47. 0.0094 21-1015 Rehabilitation Counselors

48. 0.0095 25-3999 Teachers and Instructors, All Other

49. 0.0095 19-4092 Forensic Science Technicians

50. 0.01 39-5091 Makeup Artists, Theatrical and Performance

51. 0.01 17-2121 Marine Engineers and Naval Architects

52. 0.01 11-9033 Education Administrators, Postsecondary

53. 0.011 17-2141 Mechanical Engineers

54. 0.012 29-1051 Pharmacists

55. 0.012 13-1081 Logisticians

56. 0.012 19-1022 Microbiologists

57. 0.012 19-3032 Industrial-Organizational Psychologists

58. 0.013 27-2022 Coaches and Scouts

59. 0.013 11-2022 Sales Managers

60. 0.014 19-2043 Hydrologists

61. 0.014 11-2021 Marketing Managers

62. 0.014 0 21-1013 Marriage and Family Therapists

63. 0.014 17-2199 Engineers, All Other

64. 0.014 13-1151 Training and Development Specialists

65. 0.014 43-1011 First-Line Supervisors of Office and Administrative Support

Workers

66. 0.015 19-1029 Biological Scientists, All Other

67. 0.015 11-2031 Public Relations and Fundraising Managers

68. 0.015 27-1014 Multimedia Artists and Animators

69. 0.015 15-1111 Computer and Information Research Scientists

70. 0.015 0 11-1011 Chief Executives

71. 0.015 0 11-9031 Education Administrators, Preschool and Childcare Cen-

ter/Program

72. 0.015 27-2041 Music Directors and Composers

73. 0.016 51-1011 First-Line Supervisors of Production and Operating Workers

74. 0.016 41-3031 Securities, Commodities, and Financial Services Sales Agents

75. 0.016 19-1031 Conservation Scientists

76. 0.016 25-2053 Special Education Teachers, Middle School

77. 0.017 17-2041 Chemical Engineers

78. 0.017 11-9041 Architectural and Engineering Managers

79. 0.017 17-2011 Aerospace Engineers

80. 0.018 11-9121 Natural Sciences Managers

81. 0.018 17-2081 Environmental Engineers

82. 0.018 17-1011 Architects, Except Landscape and Naval

83. 0.018 31-2021 Physical Therapist Assistants

62



Computerisable

Rank Probability Label soc code Occupation

84. 0.019 0 17-2051 Civil Engineers

85. 0.02 29-1199 Health Diagnosing and Treating Practitioners, All Other

86. 0.021 19-1013 Soil and Plant Scientists

87. 0.021 19-2032 Materials Scientists

88. 0.021 17-2131 Materials Engineers

89. 0.021 0 27-1022 Fashion Designers

90. 0.021 29-1123 Physical Therapists

91. 0.021 27-4021 Photographers

92. 0.022 27-2012 Producers and Directors

93. 0.022 27-1025 Interior Designers

94. 0.023 29-1023 Orthodontists

95. 0.023 27-1011 Art Directors

96. 0.025 33-1011 First-Line Supervisors of Correctional Officers

97. 0.025 21-2021 Directors, Religious Activities and Education

98. 0.025 17-2072 Electronics Engineers, Except Computer

99. 0.027 19-1021 Biochemists and Biophysicists

100. 0.027 29-1011 Chiropractors

101. 0.028 31-2011 Occupational Therapy Assistants

102. 0.028 21-1021 Child, Family, and School Social Workers

103. 0.028 17-2111 Health and Safety Engineers, Except Mining Safety Engineers

and Inspectors

104. 0.029 17-2112 Industrial Engineers

105. 0.029 53-1031 First-Line Supervisors of Transportation and Material-Moving

Machine and Vehicle Operators

106. 0.029 29-2056 Veterinary Technologists and Technicians

107. 0.03 11-3051 Industrial Production Managers

108. 0.03 17-3026 Industrial Engineering Technicians

109. 0.03 15-1142 Network and Computer Systems Administrators

110. 0.03 15-1141 Database Administrators

111. 0.03 11-3061 Purchasing Managers

112. 0.032 25-1000 Postsecondary Teachers

113. 0.033 19-2041 Environmental Scientists and Specialists, Including Health

114. 0.033 0 21-1011 Substance Abuse and Behavioral Disorder Counselors

115. 0.035 0 23-1011 Lawyers

116. 0.035 27-1012 Craft Artists

117. 0.035 15-2031 Operations Research Analysts

118. 0.035 11-3021 Computer and Information Systems Managers

119. 0.037 27-1021 Commercial and Industrial Designers

120. 0.037 17-2031 Biomedical Engineers

121. 0.037 0 13-1121 Meeting, Convention, and Event Planners

122. 0.038 29-1131 Veterinarians

123. 0.038 27-3043 Writers and Authors

124. 0.039 11-2011 Advertising and Promotions Managers

125. 0.039 19-3094 Political Scientists

126. 0.04 13-2071 Credit Counselors

127. 0.04 19-3099 Social Scientists and Related Workers, All Other

128. 0.041 19-2011 Astronomers

129. 0.041 53-5031 Ship Engineers

130. 0.042 15-1132 Software Developers, Applications

63



Computerisable

Rank Probability Label soc code Occupation

131. 0.042 27-1013 Fine Artists, Including Painters, Sculptors, and Illustrators

132. 0.043 29-2053 Psychiatric Technicians

133. 0.045 0 17-1012 Landscape Architects

134. 0.045 21-1091 Health Educators

135. 0.047 15-2021 Mathematicians

136. 0.047 27-1023 Floral Designers

137. 0.047 11-9013 Farmers, Ranchers, and Other Agricultural Managers

138. 0.048 33-2022 Forest Fire Inspectors and Prevention Specialists

139. 0.049 29-2041 Emergency Medical Technicians and Paramedics

140. 0.055 27-3041 Editors

141. 0.055 29-1024 Prosthodontists

142. 0.055 0 29-9799 Healthcare Practitioners and Technical Workers, All Other

143. 0.057 39-7012 Travel Guides

144. 0.058 29-2061 Licensed Practical and Licensed Vocational Nurses

145. 0.059 19-3041 Sociologists

146. 0.06 23-1022 Arbitrators, Mediators, and Conciliators

147. 0.061 19-1011 Animal Scientists

148. 0.064 39-9041 Residential Advisors

149. 0.066 53-1011 Aircraft Cargo Handling Supervisors

150. 0.066 29-1126 Respiratory Therapists

151. 0.067 27-3021 Broadcast News Analysts

152. 0.069 11-3031 Financial Managers

153. 0.07 17-2161 Nuclear Engineers

154. 0.071 11-9021 Construction Managers

155. 0.074 27-2042 Musicians and Singers

156. 0.075 41-1012 First-Line Supervisors of Non-Retail Sales Workers

157. 0.076 39-1021 First-Line Supervisors of Personal Service Workers

158. 0.077 19-1012 Food Scientists and Technologists

159. 0.08 0 13-1041 Compliance Officers

160. 0.08 33-3031 Fish and Game Wardens

161. 0.082 27-1024 Graphic Designers

162. 0.083 11-9051 Food Service Managers

163. 0.084 0 39-9011 Childcare Workers

164. 0.085 39-9031 Fitness Trainers and Aerobics Instructors

165. 0.091 11-9071 Gaming Managers

166. 0.097 49-9051 Electrical Power-Line Installers and Repairers

167. 0.098 33-3051 Police and Sheriff’s Patrol Officers

168. 0.099 41-3041 Travel Agents

169. 0.1 0 35-1011 Chefs and Head Cooks

170. 0.1 39-2011 Animal Trainers

171. 0.1 27-3011 Radio and Television Announcers

172. 0.1 0 17-2071 Electrical Engineers

173. 0.1 19-2031 Chemists

174. 0.1 29-2054 Respiratory Therapy Technicians

175. 0.1 0 19-2012 Physicists

176. 0.11 0 39-5012 Hairdressers, Hairstylists, and Cosmetologists

177. 0.11 27-3022 Reporters and Correspondents

178. 0.11 53-2021 Air Traffic Controllers

179. 0.13 27-2031 Dancers

64



Computerisable

Rank Probability Label soc code Occupation

180. 0.13 29-2033 Nuclear Medicine Technologists

181. 0.13 15-1133 Software Developers, Systems Software

182. 0.13 13-1111 Management Analysts

183. 0.13 29-2051 Dietetic Technicians

184. 0.13 19-3051 Urban and Regional Planners

185. 0.13 21-1093 Social and Human Service Assistants

186. 0.13 25-3021 Self-Enrichment Education Teachers

187. 0.13 27-4014 Sound Engineering Technicians

188. 0.14 29-1041 Optometrists

189. 0.14 17-2151 Mining and Geological Engineers, Including Mining Safety En-

gineers

190. 0.14 29-1071 Physician Assistants

191. 0.15 25-2012 Kindergarten Teachers, Except Special Education

192. 0.15 47-2111 Electricians

193. 0.16 17-2171 Petroleum Engineers

194. 0.16 43-9031 Desktop Publishers

195. 0.16 11-1021 General and Operations Managers

196. 0.17 29-9011 Occupational Health and Safety Specialists

197. 0.17 33-2011 Firefighters

198. 0.17 13-2061 Financial Examiners

199. 0.17 47-1011 First-Line Supervisors of Construction Trades and Extraction

Workers

200. 0.17 25-2022 Middle School Teachers, Except Special and Career/Technical

Education

201. 0.18 27-3031 Public Relations Specialists

202. 0.18 49-9092 Commercial Divers

203. 0.18 49-9095 Manufactured Building and Mobile Home Installers

204. 0.18 53-2011 Airline Pilots, Copilots, and Flight Engineers

205. 0.19 25-3011 Adult Basic and Secondary Education and Literacy Teachers

and Instructors

206. 0.2 19-1041 Epidemiologists

207. 0.2 39-4831 Funeral Service Managers, Directors, Morticians, and Under-

takers

208. 0.21 15-1179 Information Security Analysts, Web Developers, and Com-

puter Network Architects

209. 0.21 15-2011 Actuaries

210. 0.21 33-9011 Animal Control Workers

211. 0.21 0 39-6012 Concierges

212. 0.22 15-1799 Computer Occupations, All Other

213. 0.22 15-2041 Statisticians

214. 0.22 17-2061 Computer Hardware Engineers

215. 0.23 19-3022 Survey Researchers

216. 0.23 13-1199 Business Operations Specialists, All Other

217. 0.23 13-2051 Financial Analysts

218. 0.23 29-2037 Radiologic Technologists and Technicians

219. 0.23 29-2031 Cardiovascular Technologists and Technicians

220. 0.24 13-1011 Agents and Business Managers of Artists, Performers, and

Athletes

221. 0.24 17-3029 Engineering Technicians, Except Drafters, All Other

65



Computerisable

Rank Probability Label soc code Occupation

222. 0.25 19-3092 Geographers

223. 0.25 29-9012 Occupational Health and Safety Technicians

224. 0.25 21-1092 Probation Officers and Correctional Treatment Specialists

225. 0.25 17-3025 Environmental Engineering Technicians

226. 0.25 11-9199 Managers, All Other

227. 0.25 53-3011 Ambulance Drivers and Attendants, Except Emergency Med-

ical Technicians

228. 0.25 41-4011 Sales Representatives, Wholesale and Manufacturing, Techni-

cal and Scientific Products

229. 0.26 25-2023 Career/Technical Education Teachers, Middle School

230. 0.27 53-5021 Captains, Mates, and Pilots of Water Vessels

231. 0.27 31-2012 Occupational Therapy Aides

232. 0.27 49-9062 Medical Equipment Repairers

233. 0.28 41-1011 First-Line Supervisors of Retail Sales Workers

234. 0.28 0 27-2021 Athletes and Sports Competitors

235. 0.28 39-1011 Gaming Supervisors

236. 0.29 39-5094 Skincare Specialists

237. 0.29 13-1022 Wholesale and Retail Buyers, Except Farm Products

238. 0.3 19-4021 Biological Technicians

239. 0.3 31-9092 Medical Assistants

240. 0.3 0 19-1023 Zoologists and Wildlife Biologists

241. 0.3 35-2013 Cooks, Private Household

242. 0.31 13-1078 Human Resources, Training, and Labor Relations Specialists,

All Other

243. 0.31 33-9021 Private Detectives and Investigators

244. 0.31 27-4032 Film and Video Editors

245. 0.33 13-2099 Financial Specialists, All Other

246. 0.34 33-3021 Detectives and Criminal Investigators

247. 0.34 29-2055 Surgical Technologists

248. 0.34 29-1124 Radiation Therapists

249. 0.35 0 47-2152 Plumbers, Pipefitters, and Steamfitters

250. 0.35 0 53-2031 Flight Attendants

251. 0.35 29-2032 Diagnostic Medical Sonographers

252. 0.36 33-3011 Bailiffs

253. 0.36 51-4012 Computer Numerically Controlled Machine Tool Program-

mers, Metal and Plastic

254. 0.36 49-2022 Telecommunications Equipment Installers and Repairers, Ex-

cept Line Installers

255. 0.37 51-9051 Furnace, Kiln, Oven, Drier, and Kettle Operators and Tenders

256. 0.37 53-7061 Cleaners of Vehicles and Equipment

257. 0.37 39-4021 Funeral Attendants

258. 0.37 47-5081 Helpers–Extraction Workers

259. 0.37 27-2011 Actors

260. 0.37 53-7111 Mine Shuttle Car Operators

261. 0.38 49-2095 Electrical and Electronics Repairers, Powerhouse, Substation,

and Relay

262. 0.38 1 17-1022 Surveyors

263. 0.38 17-3027 Mechanical Engineering Technicians

264. 0.38 53-7064 Packers and Packagers, Hand

66



Computerisable

Rank Probability Label soc code Occupation

265. 0.38 27-3091 Interpreters and Translators

266. 0.39 31-1011 Home Health Aides

267. 0.39 51-6093 Upholsterers

268. 0.39 47-4021 Elevator Installers and Repairers

269. 0.39 43-3041 Gaming Cage Workers

270. 0.39 25-9011 Audio-Visual and Multimedia Collections Specialists

271. 0.4 0 23-1023 Judges, Magistrate Judges, and Magistrates

272. 0.4 49-3042 Mobile Heavy Equipment Mechanics, Except Engines

273. 0.4 29-2799 Health Technologists and Technicians, All Other

274. 0.41 45-2041 Graders and Sorters, Agricultural Products

275. 0.41 51-2041 Structural Metal Fabricators and Fitters

276. 0.41 1 23-1012 Judicial Law Clerks

277. 0.41 49-2094 Electrical and Electronics Repairers, Commercial and Indus-

trial Equipment

278. 0.42 19-4093 Forest and Conservation Technicians

279. 0.42 53-1021 First-Line Supervisors of Helpers, Laborers, and Material

Movers, Hand

280. 0.43 39-3093 Locker Room, Coatroom, and Dressing Room Attendants

281. 0.43 19-2099 Physical Scientists, All Other

282. 0.43 0 19-3011 Economists

283. 0.44 19-3093 Historians

284. 0.45 51-9082 Medical Appliance Technicians

285. 0.46 43-4031 Court, Municipal, and License Clerks

286. 0.47 13-1141 Compensation, Benefits, and Job Analysis Specialists

287. 0.47 31-1013 Psychiatric Aides

288. 0.47 29-2012 Medical and Clinical Laboratory Technicians

289. 0.48 33-2021 Fire Inspectors and Investigators

290. 0.48 17-3021 Aerospace Engineering and Operations Technicians

291. 0.48 27-1026 Merchandise Displayers and Window Trimmers

292. 0.48 47-5031 Explosives Workers, Ordnance Handling Experts, and Blasters

293. 0.48 15-1131 Computer Programmers

294. 0.49 33-9091 Crossing Guards

295. 0.49 17-2021 Agricultural Engineers

296. 0.49 47-5061 Roof Bolters, Mining

297. 0.49 49-9052 Telecommunications Line Installers and Repairers

298. 0.49 43-5031 Police, Fire, and Ambulance Dispatchers

299. 0.5 53-7033 Loading Machine Operators, Underground Mining

300. 0.5 49-9799 Installation, Maintenance, and Repair Workers, All Other

301. 0.5 23-2091 Court Reporters

302. 0.51 41-9011 Demonstrators and Product Promoters

303. 0.51 31-9091 Dental Assistants

304. 0.52 51-6041 Shoe and Leather Workers and Repairers

305. 0.52 17-3011 Architectural and Civil Drafters

306. 0.53 47-5012 Rotary Drill Operators, Oil and Gas

307. 0.53 47-4041 Hazardous Materials Removal Workers

308. 0.54 39-4011 Embalmers

309. 0.54 47-5041 Continuous Mining Machine Operators

310. 0.54 39-1012 Slot Supervisors

311. 0.54 31-9011 Massage Therapists

67



Computerisable

Rank Probability Label soc code Occupation

312. 0.54 41-3011 Advertising Sales Agents

313. 0.55 49-3022 Automotive Glass Installers and Repairers

314. 0.55 53-2012 Commercial Pilots

315. 0.55 43-4051 Customer Service Representatives

316. 0.55 27-4011 Audio and Video Equipment Technicians

317. 0.56 25-9041 Teacher Assistants

318. 0.57 45-1011 First-Line Supervisors of Farming, Fishing, and Forestry

Workers

319. 0.57 19-4031 Chemical Technicians

320. 0.57 47-3015 Helpers–Pipelayers, Plumbers, Pipefitters, and Steamfitters

321. 0.57 1 13-1051 Cost Estimators

322. 0.57 33-3052 Transit and Railroad Police

323. 0.57 37-1012 First-Line Supervisors of Landscaping, Lawn Service, and

Groundskeeping Workers

324. 0.58 13-2052 Personal Financial Advisors

325. 0.59 49-9044 Millwrights

326. 0.59 25-4013 Museum Technicians and Conservators

327. 0.59 47-5042 Mine Cutting and Channeling Machine Operators

328. 0.59 0 11-3071 Transportation, Storage, and Distribution Managers

329. 0.59 49-3092 Recreational Vehicle Service Technicians

330. 0.59 49-3023 Automotive Service Technicians and Mechanics

331. 0.6 33-3012 Correctional Officers and Jailers

332. 0.6 27-4031 Camera Operators, Television, Video, and Motion Picture

333. 0.6 51-3023 Slaughterers and Meat Packers

334. 0.61 49-2096 Electronic Equipment Installers and Repairers, Motor Vehicles

335. 0.61 31-2022 Physical Therapist Aides

336. 0.61 39-3092 Costume Attendants

337. 0.61 1 13-1161 Market Research Analysts and Marketing Specialists

338. 0.61 43-4181 Reservation and Transportation Ticket Agents and Travel

Clerks

339. 0.61 51-8031 Water and Wastewater Treatment Plant and System Opera-

tors

340. 0.61 19-4099 Life, Physical, and Social Science Technicians, All Other

341. 0.61 51-3093 Food Cooking Machine Operators and Tenders

342. 0.61 51-4122 Welding, Soldering, and Brazing Machine Setters, Operators,

and Tenders

343. 0.62 1 53-5022 Motorboat Operators

344. 0.62 47-2082 Tapers

345. 0.62 47-2151 Pipelayers

346. 0.63 19-2042 Geoscientists, Except Hydrologists and Geographers

347. 0.63 49-9012 Control and Valve Installers and Repairers, Except Mechani-

cal Door

348. 0.63 31-9799 Healthcare Support Workers, All Other

349. 0.63 35-1012 First-Line Supervisors of Food Preparation and Serving Work-

ers

350. 0.63 47-4011 Construction and Building Inspectors

351. 0.64 51-9031 Cutters and Trimmers, Hand

352. 0.64 49-9071 Maintenance and Repair Workers, General

353. 0.64 23-1021 Administrative Law Judges, Adjudicators, and Hearing Offi-

cers

68



Computerisable

Rank Probability Label soc code Occupation

354. 0.64 43-5081 Stock Clerks and Order Fillers

355. 0.64 51-8012 Power Distributors and Dispatchers

356. 0.64 47-2132 Insulation Workers, Mechanical

357. 0.65 19-4061 Social Science Research Assistants

358. 0.65 51-4041 Machinists

359. 0.65 15-1150 Computer Support Specialists

360. 0.65 25-4021 Librarians

361. 0.65 49-2097 Electronic Home Entertainment Equipment Installers and Re-

pairers

362. 0.65 49-9021 Heating, Air Conditioning, and Refrigeration Mechanics and

Installers

363. 0.65 53-7041 Hoist and Winch Operators

364. 0.66 37-2021 Pest Control Workers

365. 0.66 51-9198 Helpers–Production Workers

366. 0.66 43-9111 Statistical Assistants

367. 0.66 37-2011 Janitors and Cleaners, Except Maids and Housekeeping Clean-

ers

368. 0.66 49-3051 Motorboat Mechanics and Service Technicians

369. 0.67 51-9196 Paper Goods Machine Setters, Operators, and Tenders

370. 0.67 51-4071 Foundry Mold and Coremakers

371. 0.67 19-2021 Atmospheric and Space Scientists

372. 0.67 1 53-3021 Bus Drivers, Transit and Intercity

373. 0.67 33-9092 Lifeguards, Ski Patrol, and Other Recreational Protective Ser-

vice Workers

374. 0.67 49-9041 Industrial Machinery Mechanics

375. 0.68 43-5052 Postal Service Mail Carriers

376. 0.68 47-5071 Roustabouts, Oil and Gas

377. 0.68 47-2011 Boilermakers

378. 0.68 17-3013 Mechanical Drafters

379. 0.68 29-2021 Dental Hygienists

380. 0.69 1 53-3033 Light Truck or Delivery Services Drivers

381. 0.69 0 37-2012 Maids and Housekeeping Cleaners

382. 0.69 51-9122 Painters, Transportation Equipment

383. 0.7 43-4061 Eligibility Interviewers, Government Programs

384. 0.7 49-3093 Tire Repairers and Changers

385. 0.7 51-3092 Food Batchmakers

386. 0.7 49-2091 Avionics Technicians

387. 0.71 49-3011 Aircraft Mechanics and Service Technicians

388. 0.71 53-2022 Airfield Operations Specialists

389. 0.71 51-8093 Petroleum Pump System Operators, Refinery Operators, and

Gaugers

390. 0.71 47-4799 Construction and Related Workers, All Other

391. 0.71 29-2081 Opticians, Dispensing

392. 0.71 51-6011 Laundry and Dry-Cleaning Workers

393. 0.72 39-3091 Amusement and Recreation Attendants

394. 0.72 31-9095 Pharmacy Aides

395. 0.72 47-3016 Helpers–Roofers

396. 0.72 53-7121 Tank Car, Truck, and Ship Loaders

397. 0.72 49-9031 Home Appliance Repairers

69



Computerisable

Rank Probability Label soc code Occupation

398. 0.72 47-2031 Carpenters

399. 0.72 27-3012 Public Address System and Other Announcers

400. 0.73 51-6063 Textile Knitting and Weaving Machine Setters, Operators,

and Tenders

401. 0.73 11-3011 Administrative Services Managers

402. 0.73 47-2121 Glaziers

403. 0.73 51-2021 Coil Winders, Tapers, and Finishers

404. 0.73 49-3031 Bus and Truck Mechanics and Diesel Engine Specialists

405. 0.74 49-2011 Computer, Automated Teller, and Office Machine Repairers

406. 0.74 39-9021 Personal Care Aides

407. 0.74 27-4012 Broadcast Technicians

408. 0.74 47-3013 Helpers–Electricians

409. 0.75 11-9131 Postmasters and Mail Superintendents

410. 0.75 47-2044 Tile and Marble Setters

411. 0.75 47-2141 Painters, Construction and Maintenance

412. 0.75 53-6061 Transportation Attendants, Except Flight Attendants

413. 0.75 1 17-3022 Civil Engineering Technicians

414. 0.75 49-3041 Farm Equipment Mechanics and Service Technicians

415. 0.76 25-4011 Archivists

416. 0.76 51-9011 Chemical Equipment Operators and Tenders

417. 0.76 49-2092 Electric Motor, Power Tool, and Related Repairers

418. 0.76 45-4021 Fallers

419. 0.77 19-4091 Environmental Science and Protection Technicians, Including

Health

420. 0.77 49-9094 Locksmiths and Safe Repairers

421. 0.77 37-3013 Tree Trimmers and Pruners

422. 0.77 35-3011 Bartenders

423. 0.77 13-1023 Purchasing Agents, Except Wholesale, Retail, and Farm Prod-

ucts

424. 0.77 1 35-9021 Dishwashers

425. 0.77 0 45-3021 Hunters and Trappers

426. 0.78 31-9093 Medical Equipment Preparers

427. 0.78 51-4031 Cutting, Punching, and Press Machine Setters, Operators,

and Tenders, Metal and Plastic

428. 0.78 43-9011 Computer Operators

429. 0.78 51-8092 Gas Plant Operators

430. 0.79 43-5053 Postal Service Mail Sorters, Processors, and Processing Ma-

chine Operators

431. 0.79 53-3032 Heavy and Tractor-Trailer Truck Drivers

432. 0.79 39-5093 Shampooers

433. 0.79 47-2081 Drywall and Ceiling Tile Installers

434. 0.79 49-9098 Helpers–Installation, Maintenance, and Repair Workers

435. 0.79 49-3052 Motorcycle Mechanics

436. 0.79 51-2011 Aircraft Structure, Surfaces, Rigging, and Systems Assemblers

437. 0.79 45-4022 Logging Equipment Operators

438. 0.79 47-2042 Floor Layers, Except Carpet, Wood, and Hard Tiles

439. 0.8 39-5011 Barbers

440. 0.8 47-5011 Derrick Operators, Oil and Gas

441. 0.81 1 35-2011 Cooks, Fast Food

70



Computerisable

Rank Probability Label soc code Occupation

442. 0.81 43-9022 Word Processors and Typists

443. 0.81 1 17-3012 Electrical and Electronics Drafters

444. 0.81 17-3024 Electro-Mechanical Technicians

445. 0.81 51-9192 Cleaning, Washing, and Metal Pickling Equipment Operators

and Tenders

446. 0.81 11-9141 Property, Real Estate, and Community Association Managers

447. 0.81 43-6013 Medical Secretaries

448. 0.81 51-6021 Pressers, Textile, Garment, and Related Materials

449. 0.82 51-2031 Engine and Other Machine Assemblers

450. 0.82 49-2098 Security and Fire Alarm Systems Installers

451. 0.82 49-9045 Refractory Materials Repairers, Except Brickmasons

452. 0.82 39-2021 Nonfarm Animal Caretakers

453. 0.82 1 47-2211 Sheet Metal Workers

454. 0.82 47-2072 Pile-Driver Operators

455. 0.82 47-2021 Brickmasons and Blockmasons

456. 0.83 45-3011 Fishers and Related Fishing Workers

457. 0.83 47-2221 Structural Iron and Steel Workers

458. 0.83 53-4021 Railroad Brake, Signal, and Switch Operators

459. 0.83 53-4031 Railroad Conductors and Yardmasters

460. 0.83 35-2012 Cooks, Institution and Cafeteria

461. 0.83 53-5011 Sailors and Marine Oilers

462. 0.83 51-9023 Mixing and Blending Machine Setters, Operators, and Tenders

463. 0.83 47-3011 Helpers–Brickmasons, Blockmasons, Stonemasons, and Tile

and Marble Setters

464. 0.83 47-4091 Segmental Pavers

465. 0.83 47-2131 Insulation Workers, Floor, Ceiling, and Wall

466. 0.83 51-5112 Printing Press Operators

467. 0.83 53-6031 Automotive and Watercraft Service Attendants

468. 0.83 47-4071 Septic Tank Servicers and Sewer Pipe Cleaners

469. 0.83 39-6011 Baggage Porters and Bellhops

470. 0.83 41-2012 Gaming Change Persons and Booth Cashiers

471. 0.83 51-4023 Rolling Machine Setters, Operators, and Tenders, Metal and

Plastic

472. 0.83 47-2071 Paving, Surfacing, and Tamping Equipment Operators

473. 0.84 51-4111 Tool and Die Makers

474. 0.84 17-3023 Electrical and Electronics Engineering Technicians

475. 0.84 47-2161 Plasterers and Stucco Masons

476. 0.84 51-4192 Layout Workers, Metal and Plastic

477. 0.84 51-4034 Lathe and Turning Machine Tool Setters, Operators, and Ten-

ders, Metal and Plastic

478. 0.84 33-9032 Security Guards

479. 0.84 51-6052 Tailors, Dressmakers, and Custom Sewers

480. 0.84 53-7073 Wellhead Pumpers

481. 0.84 43-9081 Proofreaders and Copy Markers

482. 0.84 33-3041 Parking Enforcement Workers

483. 0.85 53-7062 Laborers and Freight, Stock, and Material Movers, Hand

484. 0.85 41-4012 Sales Representatives, Wholesale and Manufacturing, Except

Technical and Scientific Products

485. 0.85 1 43-5041 Meter Readers, Utilities

71



Computerisable

Rank Probability Label soc code Occupation

486. 0.85 51-8013 Power Plant Operators

487. 0.85 51-8091 Chemical Plant and System Operators

488. 0.85 47-5021 Earth Drillers, Except Oil and Gas

489. 0.85 19-4051 Nuclear Technicians

490. 0.86 43-6011 Executive Secretaries and Executive Administrative Assis-

tants

491. 0.86 51-8099 Plant and System Operators, All Other

492. 0.86 35-3041 Food Servers, Nonrestaurant

493. 0.86 51-7041 Sawing Machine Setters, Operators, and Tenders, Wood

494. 0.86 53-4041 Subway and Streetcar Operators

495. 0.86 31-9096 Veterinary Assistants and Laboratory Animal Caretakers

496. 0.86 51-9032 Cutting and Slicing Machine Setters, Operators, and Tenders

497. 0.86 41-9022 Real Estate Sales Agents

498. 0.86 1 51-4011 Computer-Controlled Machine Tool Operators, Metal and

Plastic

499. 0.86 49-9043 Maintenance Workers, Machinery

500. 0.86 43-4021 Correspondence Clerks

501. 0.87 45-2090 Miscellaneous Agricultural Workers

502. 0.87 45-4011 Forest and Conservation Workers

503. 0.87 51-4052 Pourers and Casters, Metal

504. 0.87 47-2041 Carpet Installers

505. 0.87 47-2142 Paperhangers

506. 0.87 13-1021 Buyers and Purchasing Agents, Farm Products

507. 0.87 51-7021 Furniture Finishers

508. 0.87 35-2021 Food Preparation Workers

509. 0.87 47-2043 Floor Sanders and Finishers

510. 0.87 1 53-6021 Parking Lot Attendants

511. 0.87 47-4051 Highway Maintenance Workers

512. 0.88 47-2061 Construction Laborers

513. 0.88 43-5061 Production, Planning, and Expediting Clerks

514. 0.88 51-9141 Semiconductor Processors

515. 0.88 17-1021 Cartographers and Photogrammetrists

516. 0.88 51-4051 Metal-Refining Furnace Operators and Tenders

517. 0.88 51-9012 Separating, Filtering, Clarifying, Precipitating, and Still Ma-

chine Setters, Operators, and Tenders

518. 0.88 51-6091 Extruding and Forming Machine Setters, Operators, and Ten-

ders, Synthetic and Glass Fibers

519. 0.88 47-2053 Terrazzo Workers and Finishers

520. 0.88 51-4194 Tool Grinders, Filers, and Sharpeners

521. 0.88 49-3043 Rail Car Repairers

522. 0.89 51-3011 Bakers

523. 0.89 1 31-9094 Medical Transcriptionists

524. 0.89 47-2022 Stonemasons

525. 0.89 53-3022 Bus Drivers, School or Special Client

526. 0.89 1 27-3042 Technical Writers

527. 0.89 49-9096 Riggers

528. 0.89 47-4061 Rail-Track Laying and Maintenance Equipment Operators

529. 0.89 51-8021 Stationary Engineers and Boiler Operators

530. 0.89 1 51-6031 Sewing Machine Operators

72



Computerisable

Rank Probability Label soc code Occupation

531. 0.89 1 53-3041 Taxi Drivers and Chauffeurs

532. 0.9 1 43-4161 Human Resources Assistants, Except Payroll and Timekeep-

ing

533. 0.9 29-2011 Medical and Clinical Laboratory Technologists

534. 0.9 47-2171 Reinforcing Iron and Rebar Workers

535. 0.9 47-2181 Roofers

536. 0.9 53-7021 Crane and Tower Operators

537. 0.9 53-6041 Traffic Technicians

538. 0.9 53-6051 Transportation Inspectors

539. 0.9 51-4062 Patternmakers, Metal and Plastic

540. 0.9 51-9195 Molders, Shapers, and Casters, Except Metal and Plastic

541. 0.9 13-2021 Appraisers and Assessors of Real Estate

542. 0.9 53-7072 Pump Operators, Except Wellhead Pumpers

543. 0.9 49-9097 Signal and Track Switch Repairers

544. 0.91 39-3012 Gaming and Sports Book Writers and Runners

545. 0.91 49-9063 Musical Instrument Repairers and Tuners

546. 0.91 39-7011 Tour Guides and Escorts

547. 0.91 49-9011 Mechanical Door Repairers

548. 0.91 51-3091 Food and Tobacco Roasting, Baking, and Drying Machine Op-

erators and Tenders

549. 0.91 53-7071 Gas Compressor and Gas Pumping Station Operators

550. 0.91 29-2071 Medical Records and Health Information Technicians

551. 0.91 51-9121 Coating, Painting, and Spraying Machine Setters, Operators,

and Tenders

552. 0.91 51-4081 Multiple Machine Tool Setters, Operators, and Tenders, Metal

and Plastic

553. 0.91 53-4013 Rail Yard Engineers, Dinkey Operators, and Hostlers

554. 0.91 49-2093 Electrical and Electronics Installers and Repairers, Trans-

portation Equipment

555. 0.91 35-9011 Dining Room and Cafeteria Attendants and Bartender

Helpers

556. 0.91 51-4191 Heat Treating Equipment Setters, Operators, and Tenders,

Metal and Plastic

557. 0.91 19-4041 Geological and Petroleum Technicians

558. 0.91 49-3021 Automotive Body and Related Repairers

559. 0.91 51-7032 Patternmakers, Wood

560. 0.91 51-4021 Extruding and Drawing Machine Setters, Operators, and Ten-

ders, Metal and Plastic

561. 0.92 43-9071 Office Machine Operators, Except Computer

562. 0.92 29-2052 Pharmacy Technicians

563. 0.92 43-4131 Loan Interviewers and Clerks

564. 0.92 53-7031 Dredge Operators

565. 0.92 41-3021 Insurance Sales Agents

566. 0.92 51-7011 Cabinetmakers and Bench Carpenters

567. 0.92 51-9123 Painting, Coating, and Decorating Workers

568. 0.92 47-4031 Fence Erectors

569. 0.92 51-4193 Plating and Coating Machine Setters, Operators, and Tenders,

Metal and Plastic

570. 0.92 41-2031 Retail Salespersons

73



Computerisable

Rank Probability Label soc code Occupation

571. 0.92 35-3021 Combined Food Preparation and Serving Workers, Including

Fast Food

572. 0.92 51-9399 Production Workers, All Other

573. 0.92 47-3012 Helpers–Carpenters

574. 0.93 51-9193 Cooling and Freezing Equipment Operators and Tenders

575. 0.93 51-2091 Fiberglass Laminators and Fabricators

576. 0.93 47-5013 Service Unit Operators, Oil, Gas, and Mining

577. 0.93 53-7011 Conveyor Operators and Tenders

578. 0.93 49-3053 Outdoor Power Equipment and Other Small Engine Mechan-

ics

579. 0.93 53-4012 Locomotive Firers

580. 0.93 53-7063 Machine Feeders and Offbearers

581. 0.93 51-4061 Model Makers, Metal and Plastic

582. 0.93 49-2021 Radio, Cellular, and Tower Equipment Installers and Repairs

583. 0.93 51-3021 Butchers and Meat Cutters

584. 0.93 51-9041 Extruding, Forming, Pressing, and Compacting Machine Set-

ters, Operators, and Tenders

585. 0.93 53-7081 Refuse and Recyclable Material Collectors

586. 0.93 1 13-2081 Tax Examiners and Collectors, and Revenue Agents

587. 0.93 51-4022 Forging Machine Setters, Operators, and Tenders, Metal and

Plastic

588. 0.93 1 53-7051 Industrial Truck and Tractor Operators

589. 0.94 1 13-2011 Accountants and Auditors

590. 0.94 51-4032 Drilling and Boring Machine Tool Setters, Operators, and

Tenders, Metal and Plastic

591. 0.94 43-9051 Mail Clerks and Mail Machine Operators, Except Postal Ser-

vice

592. 0.94 0 35-3031 Waiters and Waitresses

593. 0.94 51-3022 Meat, Poultry, and Fish Cutters and Trimmers

594. 0.94 13-2031 Budget Analysts

595. 0.94 47-2051 Cement Masons and Concrete Finishers

596. 0.94 49-3091 Bicycle Repairers

597. 0.94 49-9091 Coin, Vending, and Amusement Machine Servicers and Re-

pairers

598. 0.94 51-4121 Welders, Cutters, Solderers, and Brazers

599. 0.94 1 43-5021 Couriers and Messengers

600. 0.94 43-4111 Interviewers, Except Eligibility and Loan

601. 0.94 35-2015 Cooks, Short Order

602. 0.94 53-7032 Excavating and Loading Machine and Dragline Operators

603. 0.94 47-3014 Helpers–Painters, Paperhangers, Plasterers, and Stucco Ma-

sons

604. 0.94 43-4081 Hotel, Motel, and Resort Desk Clerks

605. 0.94 51-9197 Tire Builders

606. 0.94 41-9091 Door-to-Door Sales Workers, News and Street Vendors, and

Related Workers

607. 0.94 37-1011 First-Line Supervisors of Housekeeping and Janitorial Workers

608. 0.94 45-2011 Agricultural Inspectors

609. 0.94 1 23-2011 Paralegals and Legal Assistants

610. 0.95 39-5092 Manicurists and Pedicurists

74



Computerisable

Rank Probability Label soc code Occupation

611. 0.95 43-5111 Weighers, Measurers, Checkers, and Samplers, Recordkeeping

612. 0.95 51-6062 Textile Cutting Machine Setters, Operators, and Tenders

613. 0.95 43-3011 Bill and Account Collectors

614. 0.95 51-8011 Nuclear Power Reactor Operators

615. 0.95 33-9031 Gaming Surveillance Officers and Gaming Investigators

616. 0.95 43-4121 Library Assistants, Clerical

617. 0.95 47-2073 Operating Engineers and Other Construction Equipment Op-

erators

618. 0.95 51-5113 Print Binding and Finishing Workers

619. 0.95 45-2021 Animal Breeders

620. 0.95 51-4072 Molding, Coremaking, and Casting Machine Setters, Opera-

tors, and Tenders, Metal and Plastic

621. 0.95 1 51-2022 Electrical and Electronic Equipment Assemblers

622. 0.95 51-9191 Adhesive Bonding Machine Operators and Tenders

623. 0.95 37-3011 Landscaping and Groundskeeping Workers

624. 0.95 51-4033 Grinding, Lapping, Polishing, and Buffing Machine Tool Set-

ters, Operators, and Tenders, Metal and Plastic

625. 0.95 43-5051 Postal Service Clerks

626. 0.95 51-9071 Jewelers and Precious Stone and Metal Workers

627. 0.96 43-5032 Dispatchers, Except Police, Fire, and Ambulance

628. 0.96 43-4171 Receptionists and Information Clerks

629. 0.96 43-9061 Office Clerks, General

630. 0.96 11-3111 Compensation and Benefits Managers

631. 0.96 1 43-2011 Switchboard Operators, Including Answering Service

632. 0.96 35-3022 Counter Attendants, Cafeteria, Food Concession, and Coffee

Shop

633. 0.96 47-5051 Rock Splitters, Quarry

634. 0.96 43-6014 Secretaries and Administrative Assistants, Except Legal, Med-

ical, and Executive

635. 0.96 17-3031 Surveying and Mapping Technicians

636. 0.96 51-7031 Model Makers, Wood

637. 0.96 51-6064 Textile Winding, Twisting, and Drawing Out Machine Setters,

Operators, and Tenders

638. 0.96 53-4011 Locomotive Engineers

639. 0.96 1 39-3011 Gaming Dealers

640. 0.96 49-9093 Fabric Menders, Except Garment

641. 0.96 35-2014 Cooks, Restaurant

642. 0.96 39-3031 Ushers, Lobby Attendants, and Ticket Takers

643. 0.96 43-3021 Billing and Posting Clerks

644. 0.97 53-6011 Bridge and Lock Tenders

645. 0.97 51-7042 Woodworking Machine Setters, Operators, and Tenders, Ex-

cept Sawing

646. 0.97 51-2092 Team Assemblers

647. 0.97 51-6042 Shoe Machine Operators and Tenders

648. 0.97 51-2023 Electromechanical Equipment Assemblers

649. 0.97 1 13-1074 Farm Labor Contractors

650. 0.97 51-6061 Textile Bleaching and Dyeing Machine Operators and Tenders

651. 0.97 51-9081 Dental Laboratory Technicians

652. 0.97 51-9021 Crushing, Grinding, and Polishing Machine Setters, Opera-

tors, and Tenders

75



Computerisable

Rank Probability Label soc code Occupation

653. 0.97 51-9022 Grinding and Polishing Workers, Hand

654. 0.97 37-3012 Pesticide Handlers, Sprayers, and Applicators, Vegetation

655. 0.97 45-4023 Log Graders and Scalers

656. 0.97 51-9083 Ophthalmic Laboratory Technicians

657. 0.97 1 41-2011 Cashiers

658. 0.97 49-9061 Camera and Photographic Equipment Repairers

659. 0.97 39-3021 Motion Picture Projectionists

660. 0.97 51-5111 Prepress Technicians and Workers

661. 0.97 41-2021 Counter and Rental Clerks

662. 0.97 1 43-4071 File Clerks

663. 0.97 41-9021 Real Estate Brokers

664. 0.97 43-2021 Telephone Operators

665. 0.97 19-4011 Agricultural and Food Science Technicians

666. 0.97 43-3051 Payroll and Timekeeping Clerks

667. 0.97 1 43-4041 Credit Authorizers, Checkers, and Clerks

668. 0.97 35-9031 Hosts and Hostesses, Restaurant, Lounge, and Coffee Shop

669. 0.98 41-9012 Models

670. 0.98 51-9061 Inspectors, Testers, Sorters, Samplers, and Weighers

671. 0.98 43-3031 Bookkeeping, Accounting, and Auditing Clerks

672. 0.98 43-6012 Legal Secretaries

673. 0.98 27-4013 Radio Operators

674. 0.98 53-3031 Driver/Sales Workers

675. 0.98 1 13-1031 Claims Adjusters, Examiners, and Investigators

676. 0.98 41-2022 Parts Salespersons

677. 0.98 1 13-2041 Credit Analysts

678. 0.98 51-4035 Milling and Planing Machine Setters, Operators, and Tenders,

Metal and Plastic

679. 0.98 43-5071 Shipping, Receiving, and Traffic Clerks

680. 0.98 43-3061 Procurement Clerks

681. 0.98 51-9111 Packaging and Filling Machine Operators and Tenders

682. 0.98 51-9194 Etchers and Engravers

683. 0.98 43-3071 Tellers

684. 0.98 27-2023 Umpires, Referees, and Other Sports Officials

685. 0.98 13-1032 Insurance Appraisers, Auto Damage

686. 0.98 1 13-2072 Loan Officers

687. 0.98 43-4151 Order Clerks

688. 0.98 43-4011 Brokerage Clerks

689. 0.98 43-9041 Insurance Claims and Policy Processing Clerks

690. 0.98 51-2093 Timing Device Assemblers and Adjusters

691. 0.99 1 43-9021 Data Entry Keyers

692. 0.99 25-4031 Library Technicians

693. 0.99 43-4141 New Accounts Clerks

694. 0.99 51-9151 Photographic Process Workers and Processing Machine Oper-

ators

695. 0.99 13-2082 Tax Preparers

696. 0.99 43-5011 Cargo and Freight Agents

697. 0.99 49-9064 Watch Repairers

698. 0.99 1 13-2053 Insurance Underwriters

699. 0.99 15-2091 Mathematical Technicians

76



Computerisable

Rank Probability Label soc code Occupation

700. 0.99 51-6051 Sewers, Hand

701. 0.99 23-2093 Title Examiners, Abstractors, and Searchers

702. 0.99 41-9041 Telemarketers

77



Oxford Martin Programme on Technology & Employment

Directors
Dr Carl Benedikt Frey, Oxford Martin Citi Fellow
Professor Michael Osborne, Associate Professor in Machine Learning

Oxford Martin Fellow
Dr Chinchih Chen

The Oxford Martin Programme on Technology and Employment is part of the Oxford 
Martin School’s research partnership with Citi. It investigates the implications of a 
rapidly changing technological landscape for economies and societies. The programme 
will provide an in-depth understanding of how technology is transforming the 
economy, to help leaders create a successful transition into new ways of working in the 
21st Century. 

The programme is providing novel and relevant evidence on: how technology is 
transforming companies and industries; why some places are better at adapting to 
this transformation; and related implications for living standards, inequality and social 
mobility.

This working paper was originally published in September 2013 under the auspices of
the Oxford Martin Programme on the Impacts of Future Technology.

Oxford Martin Programme on Technology and Employment
Oxford Martin School
University of Oxford
34 Broad Street
Oxford OX1 3BD
United Kingdom

Tel: +44 (0)1865 272898
Email: info@oxfordmartin.ox.ac.uk
Web: www.oxfordmartin.ox.ac.uk/research/programmes/tech-employment




