









































Structural Transformation and the Rise of Information
Technology

Giovanni Gallipoli and Christos A. Makridis∗

October 16, 2017

PREPARED FOR THE CARNEGIE ROCHESTER AND NYU
CONFERENCE ON PUBLIC POLICY

Abstract

Has the emergence of information technology changed the structure of employment and
earnings in the US? We propose a new index of occupation-level IT intensity and document
several long-term changes in the occupational landscape over the past decades. Using the
Decennial Census between 1970 and 2015, we show that: (i) the share of workers in IT-
intensive jobs has expanded significantly, with little or no pause; (ii) IT jobs enjoy a large
and growing earnings premium, even after controlling for general task requirements (e.g.,
cognitive, non-routine); and (iii) the rise of the IT employment share is closely associated with
declines in the manufacturing employment share. Although the earnings premia for college-
educated and high cognitive/non-routine skilled workers have declined in the aggregate since
2000, we show that they have continued growing in IT jobs. We subsequently introduce
an equilibrium model of comparative advantage between IT and non-IT jobs to quantify
the contribution of IT jobs towards accelerating the pace of structural transformation. Our
results suggest that technological growth among IT jobs has played a major role in accounting
for the surge in labor productivity among high tech services sectors since 1980.

∗Corresponding author: Christos Makridis, Department of Management Science & Engineering, Depart-
ment of Economics, Huang Engineering Center, 475 Via Ortega, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305-4121,
cmakridi@stanford.edu (http://stanford.edu/~cmakridi/). Giovanni Gallipoli: Vancouver School of Economics,
University of British Columbia, gallipol@mail.ubc.ca. We thank Murilo Esteves de Santi, Elba Gomez Navas and
Dante Zago for valuable research assistance. We also thank David Autor and Paul Gaggl.

1



2

1 Introduction

Understanding large scale sectoral reallocation is essential for identifying the factors of techno-
logical change and growth (Baumol, 1967; Kuznets, 1973), such as the decline in the agricultural
employment share (Gollin et al., 2002), the rise of the service economy (Buera and Kaboski,
2012), and the rise in job polarization (Barany and Siegel, 2017). Leading theories of structural
transformation focus on either demand-side mechanisms, which introduce heterogeneity in income
elasticities (Kongsamut et al., 2001), or supply-side mechanisms, which highlight heterogeneity in
sectoral growth rates (Ngai and Pissarides, 2007; Acemoglu and Guerrieri, 2008).1

Evidence suggests that, over the past few decades, differences in technological progress across
sectors have been crucial for structural transformation in the United States (Herrendorf et al.,
2015). Both labor productivity growth and the expansion in the employment share in services
have continued at a relatively strong pace. Because the services sector has lower output per worker
than manufacturing, models that posit wage equalization predict that increases in expenditures
on labor-intensive services would eventually be reflected in lower aggregate productivity growth
(Baumol, 1967).2 In other words, given that the services sector has kept expanding both in terms
of its employment and labor compensation shares, standard models tend to predict stagnation in
labor productivity. This paper explains why this has not happened.

We show that the emergence of jobs that are intensive in information technology (IT) tasks
may have helped avoid this long term stagnation; see Figure 1 for motivating evidence on the
relationship between IT and the manufacturing employment share since 1970. Our argument is
that technological discoveries, such as the introduction of personal computers in the 1970s and
the spread of the internet in the 1990s, have led to an expansion of IT-intensive jobs. These jobs,
however, only imperfectly substitute for non-IT jobs. And, these jobs are closer substitutes in the
manufacturing, rather than services, sector.3 We argue that, while the rise of IT-intensive jobs

1Combining both of these mechanisms has also received attention; see, for example, Buera and Kaboski (2009).
Boppart (2014) and Comin et al. (2015) reconcile these mechanisms by modifying preferences.

2As Baumol wrote in in his 1967 article, “...if wages and productivity in the progressive sector both go up 2 per
cent per year, costs there will not rise at all. On the other hand, if in the non progressive sector productivity is
constant, every rise in wages must yield a corresponding addition to costs-a two per cent cumulative rise in wages
means that, year in year out, costs must be two per cent above those of the preceding year. Thus, the very progress
of the technologically progressive sectors inevitably adds to the costs of the technologically unchanging sectors of
the economy, unless somehow the labor markets in these areas can be sealed off and wages held absolutely constant,
a most unlikely possibility.”

3We formally estimate these elasticities later, but for anecdotal evidence, consider the instance where a mere
14 workers in a manufacturing plant in Austria produce 500,000 tons of steel a year:
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2017-06-21/how-just-14-people-make-500-000-tons-of-steel-a-year-



3

accelerated the rate of structural transformation in manufacturing, it did not result in an equal
displacement of jobs in the non-IT-intensive services sector nor in equalization of the marginal
product of different tasks. In this sense, the emergence of IT-intensive jobs may account for much
of the continued rise in value added per worker of the past decades. This increased productivity
is not fully reduced by shifts in employment, especially in the services sector.4 We also provide
direct evidence that these productivity effects show up in sectoral real output and value added.

[INSERT FIGURE 1 HERE]

In the first part of the paper, we document three novel stylized facts. We begin by separately
examining productivity growth in the manufacturing and services sectors and show that, while
gross output per worker in manufacturing exceeds that in services, value added per worker is
actually larger in services. Moreover, since the 1990s, most of the growth in value added per
worker has come from high tech service industries, which exhibit nearly twice as large value added
per worker on average than the average manufacturing industry.5

To shed light on the cause of these sectoral differences, we introduce a new measurement
strategy to identify jobs with greater intensity of information technology and associated tasks.
Using detailed six-digit occupation classifications from O*NET, we study the cross-section and
time series evolution of IT-intensive jobs and their earnings premium. We combine the Decennial
Census and the Current Population Survey (CPS) and document that the share of IT-intensive
workers has grown from 33% to 45% between 1970 and 2015, depending on the measurement
approach. Similarly, the earnings premium in these jobs has grown from 40% to 65% over the
same period. These results are consistent with a broader literature about information technology
and firm productivity (Bresnahan et al., 2002; Brynjolfsson and Hitt, 2003; Bloom et al., 2012;
Tambe and Hitt, 2012). We also compare our results with recent evidence about the flattening
of the college premium (Valletta, 2016) and decline in the demand for cognitive and non-routine
(“C/NR”) skills (Beaudry et al., 2016). Despite the flattening of returns in the broader cross-
section, there continues to be a steady rise in the C/NR premium among IT workers.

We also exploit within-county variation between 1980 and 2013 and find that a percentage
point (pp) rise in the IT employment share is associated with a non-trivial 0.36pp decline in the
in-austria.

4These results are consistent with anecdotal evidence from, for example, a LinkedIn survey of employers in 2016
that found 22 out of the 25 skills that recruiters are most interested in are technology and information technology
related; https://blog.linkedin.com/2016/01/12/the-25-skills-that-can-get-you-hired-in-2016

5We follow the approach suggested by Herrendorf et al. (2013) by focusing on value added through occupational
tasks, rather than gross output.



4

manufacturing employment share under our preferred specification. Our conditional correlations
are identified from decadal within-county variation in employment shares, after controlling for
demographic shifts and average wages. The results are robust to instrumenting for the contempo-
raneous IT employment share between 1990 and 2013.6 The fact that these conditional correlations
hold even after controlling for average wages points towards the possibility that differences in pro-
ductivity are a driver of structural transformation (Ngai and Pissarides, 2007).7

Of course, unobserved differences among individual workers in high and low IT jobs might
confound our descriptive results. In the second part of our paper, therefore, we develop a model
featuring task and worker heterogeneity based on the original approach of Adao (2016). Rather
than controlling for worker heterogeneity, the model explicitly incorporates individuals’ compar-
ative advantage in a Roy-like setting. Under the assumption that workers have comparative
advantages over IT and non-IT tasks, we estimate key model parameters and use these estimates
to decompose the contribution of price variation, hours worked and workers’ quality (composition)
to structural transformation. This approach also allows us to quantify the relative subsitutability
of IT and non-IT labor inputs separately for the manufacturing and the services sectors.8 In
particular, we find that these labor inputs are less substitutable in the services sector, with an
elasticity of 1.31 versus 1.62 in the manufacturing sector.9

The model allows us to derive estimable relationship linking price changes to quantity changes,
and we use these empirical relationship to construct counterfactual price changes and hours
changes. In particular, we show that: (i) price adjustment play a critical role in mitigating shifts
in the employment structure; (ii) quantity responses to price changes are more pronounced in the
manufacturing sector, which explains the crowding out of non IT jobs and the continuing decline
of the manufacturing share; (iii) the services sector exhibits more stable employment structure, as
well as large and persistent productivity growth in IT jobs, relative to non-IT jobs.

Our work also connects with two broad, recent debates about the role of technology for labor
markets and productivity. The first such debate examines the decline in productivity growth over

6We also use the 1980 IT employment share as an instrument, which is pre-determined with respect to both
contemporaneous outcomes and to the “China shock”.

7Alternative theories that focus instead on income effects emphasize structural changes in per capita income.
8While traditional SBTC contributions have focused on college attainment as a proxy for skill (Katz and

Murphy, 1992; Autor et al., 2006) and/or heterogeneity between non-routine & cognitively intensive occupations
(Autor et al., 2008; Autor and Dorn, 2013), an important feature of the SBTC intellectual foundation is that it
can accommodate alternative, relevant sources of heterogeneity, such as age (Card and Lemieux, 2001) and gender
(Acemoglu et al., 2004). See Acemoglu and Autor (2011) for a survey.

9We are able to reject the null that these elasticities with an F -statistic of 33.



5

the past fifteen years. While some prominent researchers have argued that productivity might
simply be mismeasured due to the difficulty of quantifying output in technology-intensive activities
(Brynjolfsson and McAfee, 2011; Mokyr, 2014; Bryne et al., 2013; Feldstein, 2015; Hatzius and
Dawsey, 2015; Bryne et al., 2016), Syverson (2017) suggests that any mismeasurement that exists
is uncorrelated with IT productivity growth and something else might be at work.10 Acemoglu
et al. (2014) examine productivity growth in the manufacturing sector, finding that it was in fact
rather low in IT-using industries. Rather than arguing that productivity growth is mismeasured
and/or higher than measured in the manufacturing sector, our work simply points towards an
important dimension of heterogeneity—namely, that significant productivity growth may be more
recently coming from IT-intensive jobs in the services sector.

The second literature we contribute towards highlights growing concerns about automation and
income inequality. For example, Harrigan et al. (2016) use administrative data from France to
show that information technology and technological change have played major roles in facilitating
dimensions of job polarization.11 Unlike us, however, they focus specifically on technical managers
/ engineers and technicians (“techies”), rather than information technology workers as defined by
occupational task descriptions, to study polarization in the distribution of jobs. In a similar vein,
while some prominent experts have argued that a whopping 47% of U.S. employment is at risk of
being displaced by automation (Frey and Osborne, 2013), Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017b) show
that continuing automation is consistent with balanced growth, creating new tasks and raising the
demand for heterogeneous skills. Even in the presence of short-run displacement of jobs (Acemoglu
and Restrepo, 2017a), which clearly matter for welfare and distributional considerations (Eden and
Gaggl, 2017), what matters most for structural transformation is the long-run demand for skills.
In this sense, our paper contributes towards a better understanding of how information technology
shapes the sorting of workers across sectors and the role of price effects in moderating reallocation.
These features will play an important role in further developing the current models (e.g., Buera
and Kaboski (2012), Herrendorf et al. (2013), Boppart (2014), and Comin et al. (2015)) and
characterizing the next stage of structural transformation—the move towards information services.

10See an interesting discussion here: https://www.wsj.com/articles/silicon-valley-doesnt-believe-u-s-
productivity-is-down-1437100700

11Their contribution relates with Autor et al. (2003) and Autor and Dorn (2013) in that information and com-
munications technology largley complement cognitive and non-routine skills, which is a fact we provide suggestive
evidence over too when we show that the earnings premium for college and cognitive/non-routine skills has been
increasing for information technology workers (but not for non-IT workers).



6

2 Data and Measurement

2.1 Sources

Occupational Task and Network.–O*NET (http://www.onetcenter.org/questionnaires.html) is the
main source of occupation task, skill, and work environment characteristics. To construct our
measure of information technology (IT) intensity, we select several measurements in their database,
including: knowledge about computers and electronics, interacting with computers on the job,
programming skills, systems management and performance skills, quality control analysis skills,
operations analysis skills, updating and using relevant knowledge on the job, technology design
skills, analyzing data and information on the job, processing information on the job, engineering
and technology skills, management of material resources on the job; see Appendix A.1.1.

These tasks are rated with an index at the six-digit occupation level over the intensity and
frequency with which the skill, knowledge, or activity is applied on the job; we sum these in-
dices together and produce an aggregate IT index, which we standardize to a mean of zero
and standard deviation of one.12 We also construct measures of skill intensity that have been
commonly applied in the skill-biased technical change literature—including routine manual, non-
routine manual/physical, routine cognitive, non-routine cognitive/analytical, and non-routine cog-
nitive/interpersonal—and show that IT intensity predicts significant variation in hourly wages even
after controlling for these standard skill measures.13

While O*NET allows us to produce a time-varying measure of intensity between 2004-2016,
we primarily use a five-digit time-invariant indicator for high and low IT intensity occupations
matched with Census micro-data between 1970 and 2015 (harmonized to 2010 SOC codes). We
gauge our assumption that occupations that are IT-intensive from 2004 to 2016 are IT-intensive
before 2004 by examining how IT intensity between 2004-2006 predicts IT intensity between 2014-
2016. We find significant persistence: a coefficient of 1.069 (p-value = 0.00) and R-squared of
0.79. The fact that within-occupation IT intensity in the early 2000s predicts within-occupation
IT intensity a decade later does not guarantee that the same would hold over the 1980s and 1990s,

12While we implement several validation exercises, one simple approximation is to compare our highest IT
intensity occupations with those from the Census Bureau’s list (see their ACS report “Occupations in information
technology”). Appendix A.1.1 also provides a comparison.

13The broad occupation category that is closest to IT intensity jobs is that including non-routine cognitive
occupations, which consist of thought processes requiring absorption and decision-making of abstract information.
We refer readers to Aedo et al. (2013) for further details.



7

but we view the result simply as a diagnostic.14 We also experiment with an alternative index
based on Hecker (2005) who classified NAICS codes into high-technology sectors.

Occupation and Employment Statistics.–The Bureau of Labor Statistics releases annual data
at a 6-digit occupation level on employment and wages. The vast majority of these occupations
can be matched with O*NET data on information technology intensity. However, after 2012 the
level of granularity in the OES tables begins to surpass O*NET in some dimensions. There are
667 occupations between 2000 and 2003, 714 between 2004 and 2009, 734 between 2010 and 2011,
and 769 between 2012 and 2015 that match over. We use these data as a validation source for a
few exercises because of its granularity and comprehensive span.

Individual Micro-data.–We primarily draw from the and Census Bureau’s American Commu-
nity Survey (ACS) and Decennial Census between 1970 and 2015 accessed through the Integrated
Public Use Microdata (IPUMS) data portal at the University of Minnesota, as well as the annual
Current Population Survey (CPS) for several robustness exercises that allow us to hone in on
within-decade variation. To mitigate concerns about partial attachment to the labor market we
restrict our samples to full-time workers between age 20 and 65, with over $5,000 in annual labor
income, at least 20 weeks worked per year, and over $2 hourly wages. We deflate nominal variables
using the 2010 real personal consumption expenditure index.

Industry Classifications.–We define the services sector based on the following industries: util-
ities, transportation and warehousing, wholesale and retail trade, information, finance and in-
surance, real estate, professional / scientific / technical services, management of companies and
enterprises, administrative and support / waste and remediation services, educational services,
healthcare and social assistance, arts / entertainment / recreation, accommodation and food ser-
vices, and other personal services.15 We also consider several specifications where we further
partition the services sector into high and low technology sub-sectors. The high tech set includes
finance, insurance, real estate, and business services, while the wholesale / retail trade, utilities,
transportation, and personal / other services are in the low-tech sector.16 We define the manufac-

14Other approaches are emerging to classify jobs too. For one clever and resourceful example, see Atalay et al.
(2017) who use textual analysis to recover measures of skill and task intensity between 1960 and 2000 to help
explain the rise in earnings inequality.

15https://www.census.gov/econ/services.html
16These results are robust to including the education and healthcare sectors as low skilled. While they

clearly contain pockets of highly skilled workers, many are not. Our classification comes from the Census
(https://www.bls.gov/opub/mlr/2005/07/art6full.pdf), but we also have examined college attainment across these
sectors. We can also include agriculture, forestry, and mining in the manufacturing sector, but these employment
shares are quite small and, therefore, do not affect our results in a meaningful way.



8

turing sector based on NAICS 31-33 codes—that is, non-durable and durable manufacturing.

2.2 Measuring IT-Intensity across Jobs

One contribution of our analysis is the introduction of a task-based measure of the intensity of
information technology (IT) tasks within a job.17 Since IT jobs are not a well-defined category,
we pursue several strategies that appear to converge towards similar results as our baseline. Our
primary approach uses several O*NET measurements—a combination of task, knowledge, and
skill intensities—that are broadly related with technology and data, and subsequently takes an
unweighted average of them to produce an index.18 Using the sum of these indices, we define jobs
as high or low in information technology (IT) intensity if they are above or below the median index
value, respectively.19 Using the aforementioned definition as the baseline, Figure 2 shows that there
is a significant relationship between earnings and IT intensity at the five-digit occupation level: a
standard deviation rise in IT intensity is associated with a 0.83% increase in annual earnings.

[INSERT FIGURE 2 HERE]

We also pursue two other strategies to help validate our baseline measure. First, we draw on
the classification of high-technology occupations introduced by the Census Bureau (Hecker, 2005).
We expand the definition to include jobs that are broadly related to technology, including, for ex-
ample, media and communications specialists since 2000.20 To verify robustness we implement the
following exercises: we report the gradient of high IT jobs from regressions of logged earnings and
logged hours worked on the high IT indicator, conditional on controls, for both of our IT-intensity
measures. We recover an earnings premium of 34% using our baseline classification, whereas the
premium is 32% when we the Hecker (2005) classification. We also recover an hours premium of
6.6% and 6.5%, for each IT-intensity measure respectively. The fact that the conditional corre-
lations are statistically indistinguishable suggests that our classification is broadly capturing the
same sets of workers. Second, we draw on the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) measures of IT
capital expenditures from 2000 to 2015 and correlate them with the occupation-weighted industry

17To put this measure into context, Acemoglu et al. (2014) remark that: “A second category of explanation for
these unexpected results is that our measure of IT investment, constructed by averaging computer investment data
from 1977–2007, misses the mark.”

18See Appendix A.1.1 for a list of the full questions used on each index.
19We have experimented with alternative clustering algorithms. Treating the unweighted sum index as the

outcome feature, K-means and K-medians did not produce classifications that were significantly different from our
median-based approach. We defer to the median-based approach for its transparency and stability.

20We present a formal definition in Appendix A.1.1 that tabulates all the occupation titles.



9

measure of IT intensity implied by our baseline measure. Figure 3 plots logged IT capital and the
IT employment share at the three-digit occupation level, producing a correlation of 0.51. While
we would not expect the two variables to be perfectly correlated unless capital and labor IT are
perfect complements, the positive correlation is reassuring.

[INSERT FIGURE 3 HERE]

2.3 IT-Intensity and Heterogeneity: Descriptive Statistics

We begin by documenting the set of characteristics that are associated with IT-intensity by looking
at both jobs and workers over time and across space. These are documented in Table 1. While
there are few demographic differences between high and low IT-intensity workers—they have
similar family sizes, number of children, ages—there are significant differences in educational
attainment, hours worked, and earnings. For example, when we pool all workers together across
time, 58% of high IT workers have a college degree, whereas only 8% of low IT workers have a
college degree. The “college attainment gap” is especially wide in the 1970s where high IT workers
are 18 times more likely to have a college degree (36% versus 2%), whereas the gap declines to 5
times as likely by the 2000s (62% versus 12%). Indeed, controlling for college attainment cuts the
IT earnings premium in nearly a half from 52% to 34%, which is consistent with earlier evidence on
computerization and skill (Autor et al., 1998). However, college and IT are clearly not synonymous
with one another—we find that the IT earnings premium is 59% among college degree workers
and 30% among non-college workers.21

We also see a growing divergence along other margins, such as hours worked and earnings.
For example, while in the pooled sample, high IT workers work roughly 5.7% more than low IT
workers (2,052 hours per year versus 1,940), the gap was half as large in the 1970s with a premium
of roughly 2.5% (1,957 hours per year versus 1,908). However, by the late 2000s, the gap widened
to 7.5% (2,102 ours per year versus 1,955). Turning to earnings, we see a similar divergence over
time. For example, in the 1970s, high IT workers earned roughly 50% more than their low IT
counterparts ($41,524/year versus $27,694), but, by the late 2000s, they are earning nearly 213%
as much ($66,357 versus $31,073). Merely controlling for differences in educational attainment
and other demographic traits of workers does not narrow these hours and earnings gaps by much.
Appendix A.1.2 examines how the distribution of employment, hourly wages, and inequality varies

21The hourly wage premia are similar: 49% and 27%, respectively.



10

across jobs with high and low IT intensity. While the distribution of the hourly wage for IT jobs
is shifted significantly to the right, there is interestingly little statistical difference in within-group
inequality in high IT and low IT jobs.

[INSERT TABLE 1 HERE]

Next, we briefly explore differences in skill content across jobs with high and low IT intensity,
displayed below in Figure 4 using data from the Occupation Employment Statistics (OES) between
2000 and 2015 at the six-digit level. There is a remarkable difference in the distribution of
cognitive, technical, social, and general skills across high and low IT jobs. There are, however, no
meaningful differences across manual and service skill intensities. Crucially, there continues to be
a significant hourly wage IT premium even when controlling for differences in skill intensities at
the six-digit occupation level, suggesting that IT intensity is not simply capturing heterogeneity
in non-routine and cognitive skills. These exercises are documented in Appendix A.1.3. We also
present descriptive statistics in Appendix A.1.4 on the time series variation of IT intensity across
occupations.

[INSERT FIGURE 4 HERE]

3 Structural Change and the Emergence of Technology

and Information Services

3.1 Heterogeneity in Industry Labor Productivity

How has productivity evolved over time in the manufacturing and services sectors? Although the
manufacturing sector exhibits greater total factor productivity (TFP) (Herrendorf et al., 2015), the
purpose of this section is to document the presence of significant heterogeneity in labor productivity
(in constant dollars) within the services sector. In particular, we distinguish high-tech and low-
tech sectors based on the Hecker (2005) Census classification, rather than introducing our IT
intensity measure, to first establish a benchmark for our subsequent analysis. After documenting
these productivity facts, we later apply our IT intensity indicator, which allows for greater richness
across the entire set of six-digit occupation classifications and avoids the possible mis-classification
of employee sorting across tasks that occurs at an industry-level.



11

Using the U.S. KLEMS between 1947 and 2014, we begin by plotting average sectoral value
added and gross output per worker in Figure 5, partitioning services into high and low technology
sectors. Starting with value added per worker, we point out two useful observations. First, average
sectoral value added per worker is nearly twice as large in high technology services sectors, relative
to even the manufacturing sector. Second, the bulk of the increase in value added has been
generated from high technology services sectors.22 Although the level of average sectoral gross
output per worker is marginally lower in the high tech services sector, relative to manufacturing,
the same time series patterns carrying through.23 We will later show that one of the major
reasons for the difference in productivity between high and low tech services industries is their
heterogeneous composition of IT-intensive jobs. In this sense, while there may be large components
of the services sector that exhibit low productivity growth (e.g., trade and other services), other
services industries have been growing remarkably fast over the past decades.

[INSERT FIGURE 5 HERE]

In what follows, we will focus on value added per worker as an important measure for under-
standing aggregate productivity growth. This approach follows from our emphasis on the role of
different occupations in productions and on the way broad tasks (occupation inputs) are aggre-
gated in different industries.24 As we will discuss in greater detail, by focusing on the categories of
IT-intensive and non-IT-intensive jobs as task inputs we are able to highlight the relative contri-
bution of these broad occupation inputs to value added after netting out the role of intermediate
goods. As shown by Herrendorf et al. (2013), whether one uses value added or gross output would
also influence the measurement of consumption in general equilibrium models of structural trans-
formation. The distinction is especially important in our setting because IT jobs exhibit lower
intermediate intensity, relative to manufacturing. If the expansion of IT jobs does, at least partly,

22It is important to net out the contribution of intermediate goods and normalize by employment. Since the
intermediates share of output differs between sectors, netting out its contribution towards gross output helps us
focus on variation in labor input productivity between the two sectors. As we discuss below, we use a value added
approach to national accounting for structural transformation as described by Herrendorf et al. (2013).

23We find similar results when using TFP, constructed as the residual of logged gross output regressed on logged
employment, capital, and intermediates from USA KLEMS data. We also note that our use of the term “average
sectoral” refers to to the fact that we average productivity per worker across each sub-sector weighting by their
long term employment. While aggregate productivity per worker in manufacturing or services generates similar
patterns, we do not want to confound changes in employment (e.g., the overall size of manufacturing and services)
with the fundamentals taking place within each sub-sector.

24If the primary metric was, for example, gross output, one might want to model more explicitly how capital
stocks and expenditures on materials enter the production of final goods and services. Our empirical approach to
estimating labor subsitutability is consistent with alternative, and possibly heterogeneous, ways capital stock may
affect added value across industries.



12

affect the relative elasticity of final output to intermediates, then it is preferable to purge out
intermediates from productivity measures.25

3.2 Heterogeneity in Occupational Employment and Earnings

Having motivated our emphasis on high-tech services, we next focus on occupation heterogeneity
within both the manufacturing and services sectors. Using micro-data between 1970 and 2015 from
the Census Bureau, we begin our analysis by plotting the earnings and employment premia between
high and low IT-intensive jobs. Figure 6 plots these and shows that the earnings premium for IT-
intensive jobs has been consistently large—roughly 60% in manufacturing and 55% in services—but
has also grown over the past 45 years. The rise in the IT earnings premium was especially strong
in the services sector—moving from 42% in 1970 to 75% in 2015—versus slightly smaller growth
in the manufacturing sector from 55% to 78%. Overall, both experienced gains.

Figure 6 also shows that the share of IT jobs has grown significantly in both sectors. For
example, in 1970, non-IT jobs outmatched IT jobs by roughly 80% in manufacturing and 37% in
services. However, by the 2000s, the margin had closed dramatically with IT jobs outmatching
non-IT jobs by roughly 10% in the services sector and non-IT jobs only outmatching IT jobs by
10% in the manufacturing sector. In this sense, although there has been a relative decline in
the total manufacturing employment share, effectively all of the job losses in the manufacturing
sector have been driven by non-IT-intensive jobs. Figure 21 in Appendix A.2.2 presents additional
evidence using the CPS, showing that the employment share of IT jobs in the manufacturing sector
remained quite stable, despite the rapid decline of the overall manufacturing employment share.

[INSERT FIGURE 21 HERE]

Appendix A.2.2 replicates these earnings premia using a combination of the CPS and OES
datasets to illustrate that these premia are comparable in other standard sources. While there are
some differences in levels since the level of aggregation differs (three-digit occupation in CPS and
six-digit in OES), the qualitative patterns are the same. We also present robustness exercises using
a different classification of IT-intensive jobs, namely a more restrictive scheme introduced by the
Census Bureau that focuses heavily on science and engineering jobs (Hecker, 2005). We have also

25For example, the share of intermediates to gross output is 0.63 in manufacturing, but it is as low as 0.055 and
0.039 in the information and finance service sectors, respectively. In Appendix A.2.1 we document how the share
of IT jobs is positively correlated with both the level and growth of value added, but negatively correlated with
the share of intermediates.



13

estimated these premia controlling for demographic characteristics, such as age and education,
and found that our patterns still stand strong. We also find similar results using hourly wages,
but defer to annual earnings since hours worked are not reported in 1970.

We now examine how these patterns relate with recent results from Beaudry et al. (2014; 2016)
about the decline in demand for non-routine and cognitive (“C/NR”) skills and from Valletta
(2016) about the flattening of the college premium.26 In particular, has the flattening taken place
for all workers, or is the flattening driven by non-IT jobs? After replicating their aggregate results
using the Census, we find evidence of the latter. Beginning with educational attainment, Panel
A in Figure 7 plots the overall college premium (red) with the college premium for IT workers
(blue). Importantly, while all are larger and increasing, the premium is increasing especially for IT
workers. For example, between 1970 and 1990, the college premium grew by 9% overall, whereas
it grew by 16% for IT workers. Between 1990 and 2015, the college premium grew by 19% overall,
but it grew by a remarkable 26% for IT workers. During these periods, the supply of IT workers
was also rapidly increasing, suggesting that the supply of labor was not keeping up with the
increasing demand for IT skills in the labor market (see Appendix A.2.3 and Figure 26 for these
employment shares).

Turning towards C/NR skills, Panel B in Figure 7 plots the overall C/NR premium (red) with
the C/NR premium for IT workers (blue). Unlike the college premium, there is a closer association
between the overall C/NR and IT-C/NR premia since the majority of occupations considered high
C/NR are also high IT. Despite similarity between the two premia in 1970 bordering around 40%,
the premia began diverging in the 1990s. In particular, the IT premium among C/NR jobs begins
outpacing the overall premium by over 5%. For example, while the overall C/NR premium grew
by 14% between 1970 and 1990, it grew by 18% among IT workers. Moreover, the overall C/NR
grew by 40% between 1990 and 2015, whereas it grew by 45% among IT workers.

[INSERT FIGURE 7 HERE]

While these plots may appear inconsistent with the evidence in Beaudry et al. (2016) and
Valletta (2016) on the declining return to C/NR and college skills post-2000, they are not—they
merely highlight an important source of heterogeneity. Turning away from the longer-run phenom-

26Beaudry et al. (2016) argue that, because of the housing boom in the early 2000s, the rise of employment
in the construction and other complementary sectors masked these downward employment trends (Charles et al.,
2016). It was not until the Great Recession that these labor market changes became apparent. Autor (2017) points
out, however, that the decline in the earnings premium actually began in the 1990s, which is even more of a puzzle
since IT investment was still large at the time.



14

ena captured in Figure 7, we now introduce annual data from the American Community Survey
between 2005 and 2015 to study the returns to IT jobs among the set of college degree workers and
high C/NR jobs in more recent years. Using these data, we estimate regressions of logged annual
earnings on an indicator for high IT, college attainment (and separately high C/NR skills), and
their interaction, conditional on controls, for each year. Figure 8 plots the estimated interaction
between IT and college attainment in Panel A and IT and C/NR skills in Panel B. While the
levels of the two interactions vary, the overall pattern points towards an unambiguous rise in the
premium associated with college and C/NR skills for high IT workers. In this sense, although the
average return to college and C/NR skills might be declining overall as Beaudry et al. (2016) and
Valletta (2016) point out, they are increasing for IT-intensive jobs.

[INSERT FIGURE 8 HERE]

3.3 IT-Intensive Jobs and Structural Change: Some Evidence

Motivated by these results about the dramatic change in the labor market following the emergence
of IT-intensive jobs, we next provide some reduced-form evidence about their association with
structural transformation. In particular, we ask whether increases in the employment share of
IT have contributed to the hollowing out of manufacturing employment, after accounting for a
variety of confounding factors.27 Using our Census micro-data to produce county weighted averages
between 1980 and 2015, we run regressions of the form:

mct = βXct + γIT ct + ψc + λt + �ct (1)

where subscript c is for county and t is for year.The variable m denotes the manufacturing
employment share, X denotes a vector of local controlling covariates, IT denotes the IT employ-
ment share, and ψ and λ are county and year fixed effects. A possible endogeneity problem in
estimating Equation 1 arises from the fact that higher productivity workers might sort into IT
jobs (and thus locations with more of these jobs). However, IT jobs are comparatively less likely
to be concentrated in the manufacturing sector, which would bias γ downwards.

While we do not take a strong causal stance on γ, we do provide evidence that this relationship
is not spurious or completely contaminated by endogeneity problems. In particular, we begin by

27Since the employment share in agriculture was already quite low by the 1980s, we focus on the manufacturing
employment share in our analysis of structural transformation.



15

introducing several controls that help reduce concerns about omitted variables bias, including:
the logged hourly wage, the share of college degree workers, the share of whites, and the share of
males. The inclusion of both wages and college shares helps ensure that we are not comparing
areas with systematically different labor markets. The share of males addresses the concern of
heterogeneous entry among females into different labor markets. The inclusion of county and year
fixed effects removes all time-invariant differences across these labor markets, such as exposure to
trade shocks or local human capital networks. To address the potential endogeneity arising from
reverse causality and unobserved time-varying shocks, we also instrument the contemporaneous
IT employment share with its 1980 value, which is pre-determined in year t.

Table 2 documents our results. Column 1 presents the simple unconditional correlation, which
suggests that a percentage point rise in the IT share is associated with a 0.54 percentage point de-
cline in the manufacturing share. We subsequently introduce several controls in column 2, making
the point estimate on the IT share statistically insignificant. Here, we find that the college share is
negatively correlated with the manufacturing share, which is consistent with existing evidence on
growing polarization across industries and the skill premium (Autor and Dorn, 2013). However,
while these controls help address contemporaneous omitted variables, any time-invariant source
of spatial heterogeneity may create attenuation bias. Column 3 introduces county and year fixed
effects without controls, while column 4 adds all the controls back in. These richer specifications
document the robust result that a percentage point rise in the IT share is associated with a 0.36
percentage point decline in the manufacturing share. Column 5 concludes by instrumenting the
contemporaneous IT-intensive share between 1990 and 2015 with the historical 1980 IT-intensive
share, based on the observation that areas with early exposure to IT-intensive jobs are likely to
exhibit greater growth during the tech boom. Even if the exclusion restriction does not fully hold,
the instrumental variable estimates show that, at the very least, contemporaneous factors, like
China’s entry onto the global stage (Autor et al., 2013), are unlikely to reverse the main result.

[INSERT TABLE 2 HERE]

4 A Model of Production with Heterogeneous Tasks

In order to explicitly quantify the contribution of different factors to the emergence of IT-intensive
services sectors, we develop a model based on the original and novel contribution of Adao (2016).
The model formalizes an assignment problem of tasks and technologies in the tradition of Autor



16

(2013).28 The model contains both worker heterogeneity and sorting across tasks, which are iden-
tified using the employment shares in different demographic groups, regions, and time periods.
Estimates based on this model deliver the implied (shadow) growth rates of IT task prices, relative
to non-IT-intensive tasks, as well as estimates of the changes in labor quality composition. The
endogenous selection into sectors and task groups overcomes the conventional concerns associated
with the approach of Juhn et al. (1993).29 After estimating the model, we (i) examine the distri-
bution of the implied price and worker quality composition effects, (ii) use them to recover, in a
second step, the elasticity of substitution between IT and non-IT labor inputs, and (iii) perform
counterfactual exercises using the model’s structure.

4.1 Task Production

Following Adao’s approach, we partition jobs into groups based on geography (state) and college
attainment, denoted as g ∈ = = {1, 2, .., G}, and we allow for mobility between the manufactur-
ing and services sector. We assume that individuals enter the labor market as either college or
non-college educated workers.30 We view states as small open economies with segmented labor
markets.31 Each industry (manufacturing or services) produces its final output by combining two
inputs: an IT-intensive and a non-IT-intensive labor aggregate. We assume that these interme-
diate labor inputs are produced by aggregating individual tasks, denoted j, supplied by different
occupations. For simplicity, in the following model description we abstract from industry and we
focus on tasks; however, the choice of industry is explicitly accounted for in our empirical analysis.

Workers are heterogeneous in their idiosyncratic productivity at performing different tasks.
That is, each worker is endowed with a productivity vector [LITg (i), LNITg (i)] describing her abil-
ity to perform IT and non-IT-intensive tasks. To accommodate the variety of occupations that
workers perform, we assume that each aggregate occupation group k ∈ {IT,NIT} is a collection
of multiple (perfectly competitive) “single-task occupations” j ∈ =k. Each single task output is

28We adapt Adao’s original structure to our setting, deferring readers to Adao (2016) for derivations and a more
comprehensive discussion of analytical results.

29Under the original approach, residual wage variation might simply reflect measurement error or unpriced
amenities (Lemieux, 2006).

30We do not model the option of returning to school for continuing education.
31One could work at a commuting zone level, but we choose not to for two reasons. First, at a lower level of

aggregation, our 5% IPUMS sample begins running low on number of observations, producing imprecise shares
of IT employment. Second, in talking with geographers and the Census, the classification of commuting zones
before and after 2000 has changed quite considerably. While we could work at a county level, which has remained
consistently defined over time, our sample size issue would be amplified even further.



17

used to produce the intermediate labor output k.
The price of the task output of occupation j is denoted as pj. Like Adao (2016), we assume

that workers have identical k-specific productivity within an occupation. That is, workers perform
with identical efficiency across all occupations within k. Hence, an occupation j produces task qj

as follows:
qj = Qj(Lj1, Lj2, ..., LjG),

where Ljg =
´
Sjg
LITg (i)di if workers are employed in an IT-intensive occupation and Ljg =´

Sjg
LNITg (i)di if workers are employed in a non IT-intensive occupation. The integration set Sjg

is the set of workers of type g who are employed in occupation j. Individual efficiency units
can then be used to define a notion of comparative advantage in different occupation groups,
i.e. comparative advantage for an individual in the IT sector is sg(i) = ln(LITg /LNITg ), whereas
absolute advantage is ag(i) = LNITg . We take individual productivity as exogenous—workers draw
their efficiency from a bivariate distribution, i.e. sg(i) ∼ Fg(s) and {ag(i)|sg(i) = s} ∼ Hg(a|s).

While we assume that firms face identical labor costs and pay their workers according to their
marginal products, we will distinguish between hourly wages and marginal products, allowing for
the possibility of search frictions that lead to deviations between wages and marginal products.
Conditioning on product prices, the labor demand of sector k for group g is given by:

wkg = pj
∂Qj

∂Ljg
if j ∈ =k (2)

where wkg is the marginal product of workers in occupation class k and observable group g. Later
in the paper we estimate how the relative productivity of IT and non-IT-intensive occupations
has changed over time, and what these changes suggest about the subsitutability of different jobs
in the manufacturing and services industries. As in Roy (1951) model, individuals choose the job
that yields the highest utility, which in our case is merely a function of labor income. Letting
ykg (i) denote the potential logged hourly wage an individual i could earn in sector k, we write:

yNITg (i) = ωNITg + ag(i), yITg (i) = ωITg + sg(i) + ag(i)

where ωkg = ln(wkg ) and earnings in the IT sector are a function of both comparative and abso-
lute advantage. Because individuals receive different wages based on their comparative advantage,
they self select into the jobs that offer a higher income. Hence, the individuals employed in a



18

sector can be characterized as:

Skg ≡
{
i ∈ Ig : k = arg max{yITg (i), yNITg (i)}

}
Markets are perfectly competitive and wages are such that demand for labor equals the supply.

Since the core part of the model relies on differences in comparative advantage based on individual
productivity, we can rank individuals within each group g by their comparative advantage quantile
q ∈ [0, 1] so that σg(q) ≡ (Fg)−1(q) denotes an individual’s efficiency in the IT sector based on
their rank in the comparative advantage distribution. We can also denote the absolute advantage
within a quantile by Hg(a|σg(q)), with an average αg(q) and variance vg(q). It follows that the
logged wage schedule along the quantile range is :

Y
NIT
g (q) = ωNITg + αg(q), Y

IT
g (q) = ωITg + σg(q) + αg(q)

As shown in Adao (2016), individuals sort into the IT sector if σg(q) > ωNITg − ωITg , otherwise
they will sort into the non IT sector. Employment composition is pinned down by marginal
individuals with a comparative advantage equal to the relative efficiency-adjusted wage, i.e. ωNITg −
ωITg , such that ωNITg − ωITg = σg(lNITg ) where lNITg denotes the employment share in the non IT
sector. When we aggregate across the quantiles within each group g, the average logged wage is:

Y
k
g = ωkg + αkg(lNITg ) where αkg(l) ≡


l−1
´ l

0 αg(q)dq if k = NIT

(1− l)−1
´ 1
l

(σg(q) + αg(q))dq if k = IT

4.2 Estimating the Growth in Relative Task Prices: IT vs non-IT

For exposition, we abstract from the choice of industry and focus on a bivariate occupation choice
(IT vs non-IT). This allows us to illustrate more clearly the way we estimate growth rates in relative
returns to different tasks. In the subsequent section, we generalize the approach to account for
both occupation and industry choice, so that in the empirical implementation we estimate changes
in relative task returns across industries.

We index geographic region by r and let g denote an education-industry group. Letting Yg,r,t(π)
denote the π-th quantile of the wage growth distribution of group g in region r in period t, we use
the first-order approximation from Adao (2016) to estimate



19

∆Yg,r,t(π) = ∆ωITg,r,t +
[
∆ωNITg,r,t −∆ωITg,r,t

]
lNITg,r,t0(π) + µg,r,tXg,r,t(π) + ∆νg,r,t(π) (3)

separately for each group-by-region-by-year, where X denotes our usual set of demographic
controls. As discussed in Adao (2016), ∆νg,r,t(π) is a shock to the absolute advantage of workers
in quantile π of the log-wage distribution. Equation 3 identifies ∆ωNITg,r,t and ∆ωITg,r,t using the initial
sectoral compositions, lNITg,r,t0(π), and wage growths, ∆Yg,r,t(π), across the quantiles π of the logged
wage distribution. This approach leverages variation in the IT employment share across different
groups at the start of the sample to identify the task prices growth, ∆ωITg,r,t and ∆ωNITg,r,t . The
intuition behind Equation 3 is that, holding constant the distribution of employees at its initial
value lNITg,r,t0(π), any wage gains that accrue to workers in a given (r, g) group must be attributed
to changes in relative returns per efficiency unit. The estimator effectively captures that part of
the price variation that cannot be attributed to worker composition effects over time.

The identifying assumption in the Adao (2016) approach is that, conditional on Xg,r,t(π),
pre-shock variation in sectoral employment composition is uncorrelated with variation in labor
efficiency shocks among individuals with different levels of labor income within the same group-by-
region-by-period. The condition is satisfied under the assumptions of a Roy model since marginal
workers are indifferent between the two sectors and have similar returns in both. In other words,
the assumption more generally implies that reallocation of marginal workers cannot have first-
order equilibrium effects on the group’s overall wage distribution. A related assumption we make
is that there is sectoral reallocation between IT and non-IT jobs and between manufacturing and
services jobs; see Adao (2016) for an original discussion of these assumptions.32

Having estimated ∆ωITg,r,t and ∆ωNITg,r,t , one can recover the relative changes in workers’ compo-
sition by taking the difference between raw wages growth and estimated task prices growth.33 For
each individual (g, r, t) triplet, we are able to recover the price growth and the change in average
labor efficiency. These estimates are statistically significant for many of the triplets, although

32One concern is that a non-IT-intensive worker in the manufacturing sector may be unlikely to switch into
the services sector or re-train with new skills. We mitigate this concern by estimating our model separately for
non-college and college workers, as well as controlling for a vector of demographics. More importantly, we examined
this concern by computing the gradient between the employment share in manufacturing and the employment share
in IT jobs at a county-level separately by five age brackets. We found that the gradients were between -0.40 and
-0.46 for workers between ages 25 and 49, but -0.63 for workers above the age of 50. These results somewhat mimic
those by Autor et al. (2015), who find that the trade-employment elasticity in manufacturing is coming almost
entirely from older workers.

33Specifically, let ∆κITg,r,t and ∆κNITg,r,t denote the changes in labor efficiency (composition effects) for IT and
non-IT. We can quantify them by solving: κITg,r,t = ∆wITg,r,t/∆ωITg,r,t. To account for outliers and noise, we trim the
distributions of both price and composition growth rates at the top and bottom percentiles.



20

not for all. However, the real value of this procedure lies in the fact that it effectively allows
us to approximate the entire distribution of price growth rates for any given group and point in
time. Each individual triplet’s growth rate can be considered as a (possibly noisy) estimate of
a point in the distribution of growth rates for a given industry and group. For our subsequent
analysis, we regard the (1980 weighted) mean and median of any such distribution as a reasonable
approximation for the growth rate of prices in that industry and group.34

4.3 Accounting for Selection into Industry

In our empirical analysis, we explicitly account for the possibility that returns to tasks may vary by
industry, and that workers may have a different comparative advantage across industries. To this
purpose we extend the simple structure described in the previous section to let workers choose
between manufacturing and services. In the simple bivariate choice problem discussed in the
previous section, the marginal product growth for any given (g, r, t) triplet is a weighted average
of the marginal products of workers in IT and non-IT-intensive occupations:35

∆Yg,r,t(π) = ∆ωITg,r,tlITg,r,t0(π) + ∆ω
NIT
g,r,t l

NIT
g,r,t0(π) + ∆νg,r,t(π). (4)

The equation above can be adapted to accommodate more than two types of jobs. The intuition
is simple: growth in the marginal product within each job can be recovered by estimating the
empirical counterpart of Equation 4 where we consider each job against a combination of all other
jobs. We specifically consider four possible jobs for workers to choose from: IT manufacturing, IT
services, non-IT manufacturing and non-IT services. In the four jobs case, we can write a set of
four equations indexed by industry i ∈ {man, serv} and occupation k ∈ {IT,NIT}, as follows:

∆Yg,r,t(π) = ∆ωk,ig,r,tlk,ig,r,t0(π) + ∆ω
k,i
g,r,t(1− lk,ig,r,t0(π)) + ∆νg,r,t(π) (5)

where ωk,ig,r,t is a weighted average of the growths in marginal product for the other three jobs
(that is, those that are not in occupation k and industry i). After rearranging, we obtain the
following generalized estimation equation, characterizing the marginal product growth of the four
job groups available:

34While we have experimented using other weights, we use the number of observations in each cell from 1980. If
we, for example, allowed the weights to vary over time, we might confound and/or amplify the role of composition
effects.

35Adao (2016) provides a derivation of the result from Equation 34 in his job market paper draft.



21

∆Yg,r,t(π) = ∆ωk,ig,r,t + (∆ωk,ig,r,t −∆ωk,ig,r,t)lk,ig,r,t0(π) + ∆νg,r,t(π) (6)

Since there are two occupation groups k and two industries i,also in this case we have four
estimation equations.36 This specification allows us to recover the growth rate of IT, relative to
non-IT, tasks in each of the two industries, for all the triplets (g, r, t).

4.4 Results by Industry and Demographics

We begin by plotting the distributions of growth rates for marginal products and composition
effects in Figure 9. We do this for high and low IT jobs separately by industry, pooling across
college × year × state. Several interesting facts become apparent from this analysis. First, mean
price growth is larger in IT jobs, relative to their non-IT counterparts. For example, IT price
growth is 5% on average in the manufacturing sector and 3% in the services sector, whereas non-
IT prices are actually declining by 9% and 3% in manufacturing and services, respectively. The
fact that non-IT prices are declining in both manufacturing and services reflects the relatively
increasing demand for information services and IT tasks—an observation confirmed when we
estimate the aggregate production technology below. Moreover, the fact that price growth is
negative in non-IT jobs partly reflects the fact that the manufacturing sector is reallocating away
from non-IT jobs and replacing them with increased automation.

A natural implication of greater price growth among IT relative to non-IT jobs is that their
average worker quality composition may be slower or even negative. Although lower quality
composition growth may at first appear counter intuitive, the relationship follows from our model
setup and estimating equations. Intuitively, the employees transitioning from non-IT jobs into IT
jobs are likely lower quality (lower comparative advantage). In this sense, the cleansing effect of
reallocation leaves the higher quality workers in the non-IT jobs.37

Second, average IT price growth is slightly larger in the manufacturing sector, rather than
the services sector, by two percentage points, whereas the non-IT price growth is six percentage
points lower in the manufacturing sector. While the difference is not massive, these percentage
points cumulatively add up over several decades. The fact that IT price growth is larger in the
manufacturing sector, whereas non-IT price growth is lower, reflects the exodus of non-IT workers

36In Appendix A.3.1, we report each individual equation used for estimation.
37There is a large literature on the cleansing effects of business cycles, for example (Caballero and Hammour,

1994).



22

in the manufacturing sector as they get replaced by automation (Autor, 2014). However, as we
will show shortly, IT workers are a weaker substitute for non-IT workers in the services sector,
consistent with the discussion in Autor (2015). It is not surprising, therefore, that composition
growth among non-IT workers in the manufacturing sector is much larger than that in the services
sector (by nine percentage points) since all the marginal workers who left to move to the services
sector had less of a comparative advantage in that sector.

[INSERT FIGURE 9 HERE]

4.5 Results Across Space

We now turn towards characterizing spatial heterogeneity in the IT price premium across the
manufacturing and services sectors over the three time intervals of 1980-1990, 1990-2000, and
2000-2015 (pooling together college and non-college workers). That is, we consider the IT price
growth net of non-IT price growth, and we plot it across states for each decade in Figure 10. Some
important observations stand out. First, the manufacturing sector experienced greater IT price
premium growth throughout every decade. This is due to the differential growth of IT and non IT
task prices across industries, that we highlighted above: IT price growth is 5% on average in the
manufacturing sector and 3% in the services sector, while non-IT prices are actually declining by
9% and 3% in manufacturing and services, respectively. This means that the growth gap between
IT and non-IT task prices is much larger in the manufacturing sector, as visible in the heat maps.

Consistent with recent evidence on the increasing role of automation that crowds out rou-
tine and manual jobs (Autor et al., 2003; Autor and Dorn, 2013), nearly all the jobs that have
been lost in manufacturing have substituted for non-IT occupations. This phenomenon has been
accompanied by a significant increase in the return to IT tasks, especially large in manufacturing.

Second, the IT price premium growth began during the technology boom of the 1990s. For
example, California, Massachusetts, and Texas have been big beneficiaries of the IT price run-up
in both manufacturing and services. The relative IT price growth in manufacturing has been large
between 2000 and 2013, including in the South. This is accompanied by a progressive crowding
out of non-IT workers from the combination of automation and IT workers employment. We will
subsequently show that these results are consistent with our estimates of a higher elasticity of
substitution between IT and non-IT workers in manufacturing, which means that they respond
more flexibly towards technology shocks that raise the productivity of IT tasks.



23

In contrast, while the decline in the IT price premium between 2000 to 2013 in services might
seem puzzling, it is indication that states where the IT revolution took hold earlier (e.g. California
and Washington state) may be going through a catch up phase in terms of relative productivity
growth and relative rise in IT employment. There is evidence that the labor market did respond
to the 1990s technology boom by providing incentives for greater IT training among workers (e.g.,
through targeted college attainment as discussed by Acemoglu and Autor (2011)). This, in turn,
raised the supply of workers who could perform IT tasks. In this sense, even though we see that
the hourly wage premium has continued growing among IT workers, especially relative to non-
IT workers, the growth in the IT marginal product has slowed down and, in some cases, even
reversed. Crucially, we show later that the elasticity of substitution between IT and non-IT tasks
is significantly smaller in the services sector, which implies a faster cooling down of the IT price
premium growth in response to higher IT-intensive employment.

We also examine the cross-section of these IT price premia more rigorously by examining a
potential driving force. One possibility is that labor market distortions in some areas restrict
mobility and returns to skill accumulation, driving down the demand along the lines of Ljungqvist
and Sargent (1998) and Ljungqvist and Sargent (2008). The intuition here is that more rigid
labor markets create inertia for adapting to technological shocks and other forms of volatility,
thereby leading to greater skill depreciation and unemployment among individuals. To examine
the potential role of these labor market distortions, we use the Current Population Survey (CPS)
partitioned into year groups for 1990, 2000, 2005-2007, and 2013-2015 to produce measures of
union density and logged employment by industry × college × state cells.

We regress the IT price premium in manufacturing and services on these variables, conditional
on demographic controls (e.g., race and age). We find that a 10% rise in union density is associated
with a 5.3% rise (p-value = 0.087) in the IT price premium in the services sector, but a 1.4%
decline (p-value = 0.373) in the manufacturing sector. One interpretation of these results is that
the strengthening of unions in the services sector depresses the demand for non-IT jobs where
unionization is greater, thereby raising the relative price for IT skills. However, since unions are
relatively stronger in the manufacturing sector and exist relatively broadly in both IT and non-IT
jobs, there is not a statistically significant effect on the manufacturing IT premium. While these
results are speculative, they underscore the potential role of labor market institutions in either
amplifying or restricting the expansion of the IT price premium.

[INSERT FIGURE 10 HERE]



24

4.6 Accounting for Structural Transformation

We can use our estimates of the growth in the marginal product (shadow price) of different tasks,
and their average labor efficiency, to account for the changing factor shares of IT and non-IT
labor services in the manufacturing and services sectors. We do so by imposing restrictions on the
production structure and explicitly model the way marginal prices are determined. Crucially, in
what follows we assume that individuals can choose both industry and task group.

We posit that output (value added) in industry i, denoted Yit, is generated using aggregate IT
and non-IT efficiency-weighted labor services, denoted HITejt and HNITejt :

Yit =
[
αit

(
HITit z

IT
it

)νi + (1− αit) (HNITit zNITit )νi] 1νi (7)
where z denotes task-specific productivity shocks such that zit = exp(εit) with εit ∼ N (0, σ2i ).38

Equation 7 captures the fact that there is imperfect subsitutability of IT and non-IT labor ser-
vices, and that this subsitutability varies across industries. The efficiency-weighted inputs are the
product of total hours worked (raw hours) and efficiency per hour worked (quality):

HITit = LITit EITit , HNITit = LNITit ENITit (8)

where αit denotes the factor share of IT-intensive labor services of workers in industry i,
L denotes their work hours, and E denotes their average efficiency per hour worked. Taking
derivatives, the marginal products of effective labor services for each industry i correspond to the
shadow prices wITand wNITdefined in equation (2) . That is, the marginal products of IT and
non-IT-intensive labor services can be written as,

MP ITit = wkit =
∂Yit
∂HITit

= ∂Yit
∂Xit

(Xit)1−νi
[
αit(HITit )νi−1(zITit )νi

]

MPNITit = wNITit =
∂Yit

∂HNITit
= ∂Yit
∂Xit

(Xit)1−νi
[
(1− αit) (HNITit )νi−1(zNITit )νi

]
38We purposefully abstract from modeling capital for various reasons. First, our empirical analysis focuses on

the ratio of marginal products of IT and non-IT labor, thereby allowing us to partial out capital. In this sense our
empirical approach implicitly accommodates alternative specifications of capital across industries and education
groups (including a simple Cobb-Douglas technology in capital and aggregate labor). Second, our primary object
of interest is added value produced using IT and non-IT labor inputs. We can capture the degree of subsitutability
of labor inputs in added value across industries and education groups without making strong assumptions about
the role of capital. Finally, modelling capital is complex and beyond the scope of our analysis. In fact, we know
of no obvious way of measuring and linking IT-specific capital and IT-intensive labor inputs. However, if capital
were more complementary with IT tasks, our results would be strengthened.



25

The ratio of these marginal products implies the following equilibrium condition for each
industry i:

wITit
wNITit

=
(

αit
1− αit

)(
HITit
HNITit

)νi−1 ( zITit
zNITit

)νi
(9)

Taking logarithms ωkg = ln(wkg ) and first-differencing over time produces the following equation:

∆t
(
ωITi − ωNITi

)
= ∆t ln

(
αi

1− αi

)
+ (νi − 1)∆t ln

(
HITi
HNITi

)
+ νi∆t

(
εITi
εNITi

)
(10)

We can then recover the time varying factor shares, ∆t ln[αi/(1−αi)], and the aggregate elas-
ticity of substitution, 1/(1−νi), using the variation in marginal products, hours and efficiency that
we have previously estimated using the Adao approach. The estimated growth of shadow price pre-
mia, ∆t

(
ωITi − ωNITi

)
, vary by location and group.39 The estimation delivers the average growth,

∆ ln[αit/(1−αit)], between 1980 and 2013, which is needed to quantify the long term changes; we
call this ratio the drift since it describes what would have occurred with ∆t ln(HITi /HNITi ) = 0.40

We next present our estimated elasticities from Equation 10.41 Once we estimate ν − 1, we
recover the elasticity of substitution, 1/(1 − ν), which are reported in Table 3. We find that
manufacturing exhibits a larger elasticity of substitution (1.63) relative to the services sector
(1.31). This difference is statistically significant (p-value = 0.00) and is consistent with more
pronounced crowding out of non-IT jobs by IT jobs in the manufacturing sector over the past 40
years. We also gauge the quality of our model predictions by comparing the human capital (product
of composition and hours) premium growth between IT and non-IT jobs in manufacturing and
services sectors over the decades, displayed in Figure 11. Our model does a good job of explaining
variation in these human capital inputs, accounting for at least 79% of the variation in the data.

[INSERT TABLE 3 HERE]

[INSERT FIGURE 11 HERE]

39An alternative approach would have been to collapse all observations across different locations into a unique
growth rate. However this would have resulted in an unnecessary loss of information.

40We have also estimated specifications in which we gauge how the factor shares change over individual decades.
This information does not add anything to our long term analysis and is available. Elasticities are not sensitive to
allowing factor shares to change at different rates over time.

41We use a 3SLS estimator that allows us to combine information for different decades and weight observations
by the 1980 number of workers in each (g, r, t) cell. We restrict the elasticity to be time invariant across decades.



26

4.7 Counterfactual Exercises

Using our estimates of the elasticities of substitution between IT and non-IT labor inputs, together
with our growth growth rates in shadow prices and labor quality, we are able to implement several
counterfactual exercises. First, we examine how much of the growth in IT jobs shadow price
premium (relative to non-IT jobs shadow price) can be explained by: (i) labor quality composition
effects, (ii) changes in aggregate hours worked, and (iii) variation in factor shares ∆t ln

(
αi

1−αi

)
.

To gauge the relative importance of each of these channels, we conduct counterfactuals where we
assume that there is no growth in composition effects, hours, or factor shares. Under each scenario,
we then compute the implied growth in the IT shadow price premium, by industry. Once we have
the counterfactual price growth rates, together with an initial baseline 1980 estimate of the IT
price premium level, we can extrapolate the IT price premium forward to the year 2013.42

Table 4 documents these results.43 To see how we compute the implied role of labor quality
composition, hours, and factor share growth, consider the following example for the manufacturing
sector. Counterfactual growth in the IT price premium, absent any composition premium growth,
was 1.16% for 1980-1990, 6.18% for 1990-2000, and 8.85% for 2000-2013. Fixing the level of the
price premium to its approximated level in 1980, which was 9.2%, these growth rates compound
to a value of the IT price premium in 2013 equal to 27.7%, that is [1.092 × (1.016 × 1.0618 ×
1.0885) − 1]. This value can be contrasted with the actual change in the IT price premium
obtained by applying the actual changes of 4.01%, 16.03%, and 24.12% in 1980-1990, 1990-2000,
and 2000-2013, respectively, which compound to a premium of 63.6%.44 It follows that changes
in labor quality composition account for just less than 1/2 of the increase in the overall IT price
premium between 1980 and 2013. The economic intuition is that average labor efficiency in IT
jobs has been deteriorating relative to non-IT jobs, implying an increase in the IT price premium
(when the relative IT input goes down because of lower efficiency, its price goes up).

Table 4 documents some striking changes in the historical price ratio wIT/wNIT , which has
grown significantly in both manufacturing and services sectors between 1980 and 2013. Specifically,

42Since we do not have a direct measure of the 1980 IT job price premium (in levels), we approximate it by
taking the residual from a regression of the logged hourly wage on a vector of demographics and education fixed
effects. The approximated IT jobs price premium (relative to non-IT jobs) in 1980 is 9.2% for the manufacturing
sector and 8.9% for the services sector, which contrast with 48.5% and 49% premia in hourly wages, in the two
sectors, respectively, in the same year. The fact that demographic controls, specifically education attainment, help
bring down the magnitude of the premium provides us with some confidence that our approximation is at least
getting closer to the level of the IT price premia.

43The percent contributions do not sum up to one since our estimated models do not have an R-squared of one.
44The premium of 63.6% is obtained as 1.089× (1.0401× 1.1602× 1.2411)− 1.



27

in manufacturing wIT/wNIT jumped from 1.092 to 1.636 (a sixfold increase in the IT premium),
while in services it went from 1.089 to 1.313 (a threefold increase in the IT premium).

For manufacturing, we find that factor shares played a major role in the growth in the IT
price premium. If one removed the effect of technological change captured by the factor shares,
the IT premium in 2013 would drop from 63.6% to just over 4%. However, this change pales in
comparison to the effect of factor shares in services. When we remove the effect of exogenous
technological change captured by factor shares, the wIT/wNIT for services in 2013 drops from
1.313 to 0.040, meaning that the IT premium drops from positive 31% to negative 96%. This
result, although extreme, highlights the enormous pace of productivity changes in the services IT
sector over the past four decades. In other words, exogenous productivity growth biased towards
IT jobs accounts for the bulk of the trends in structural transformation.

The significance of growth in the factor shares resonates with our reduced-form evidence.
We showed earlier that the IT employment and earnings premia have both grown significantly
over time, especially in services. The overall drift in the relative productivity of IT jobs has,
therefore, helped shape the intensity and pace of structural transformation. In particular, both
manufacturing and services had a progressive increase in IT employment driven by growth in the
relative productivity of IT jobs. For example, nearly all of the decline in the employment share
of manufacturing took place in non-IT jobs (see Figure 21 in Appendix A.2.2). The productivity
drift in the rising share of IT-intensive jobs observed in the data translates into estimated large
factor share growth and its corresponding effects on relative prices. In fact, our results suggest
that, absent growth in these factor shares, Baumol’s cost disease would have likely overtaken the
services sector as price effects would not have led to an increase in IT-intensive jobs, which have
been integral for growth in labor productivity (Figure 5).

We also find that the changes in relative aggregate hours contributed negatively to the IT price
premium in manufacturing, and positively in services. When we remove the effect of observed
hours changes the manufacturing IT price premium in 2013 goes up to 80% from the observed
price premium of 63.6%. The intuition behind this is simple: as the relative share of IT workers
increased in manufacturing, the relative IT premium is dragged down. Historically, the ratio of IT
job hours worked in manufacturing (relative to non IT job hours) increased by almost 16% between
1980 and 2013, implying a negative equilibrium effect on the IT price premium. Interestingly, the
opposite is true for services: the ratio of hours worked in IT jobs to hours worked in non-IT
jobs actually decreased by roughly 20% between 1980 and 2013. This is not for lack of growth



28

in IT employment, which increased significantly, but rather due to the fact that the growth was
accompanied by a marginally faster growth in hours worked non IT-intensive services jobs. Using
the same equilibrium argument, this implies an increase in the IT price premium in services, so
that in our counterfactual exercise we find that the observed 31.3% IT price premium would have
been only a 10% premium in the absence of changes in relative hours worked.

These counterfactuals highlight the ways that the price of labor adjusts through different
channels—that is, through the quantity and quality of labor services and broader macroeconomic
trends that affect the drift of task-specific prices. There are two key observations we can draw
from the findings so far. First, technological change has been driving the growth of IT in the recent
past, with productivity growth being especially fast in IT service jobs. Second, this productivity
growth has been accompanied by different outcomes for non IT-intensive jobs in manufacturing
and services. In particular, disappearing non IT jobs are the main reason for the shrinking
manufacturing share, while in the services sector non IT jobs have been growing steadily with
IT jobs. In part, this is due to the fact that IT and non IT jobs are more easily substitutable
in the manufacturing sector, as indicated by the significant difference in estimated elasticity.
This however, is only a part of the story: most likely, increasing demand for skilled IT services
job outpaced the historical supply of workers that can cover them. These results relate with a
literature on the presence of potential skill mismatch (Guvenen et al., 2015) and a narrative that
there exists a “skills gap,”45 especially for IT tasks.46 This skill gap might be one of the reasons
why we observe a significant run-up in both IT tasks prices and employment.

[INSERT TABLE 4 HERE]

Our second set of counterfactual exercises examines the role of IT jobs for the transformation of
the employment structure (that is, hours worked in IT and non-IT jobs). We begin by computing
the counterfactual changes in aggregate hours that would be consistent with no change in the
relative price of IT jobs to non IT jobs (no change in the IT price premium). This scenario is
interesting because it provides a partial equilibrium counterparts to our previous results: if the
productivity changes in IT tasks had not been buffered by price adjustments, what would have
been the change in the employment structure of IT and non-IT jobs?

Historically, in the manufacturing sector, IT hours-worked have gone up from just 36.4% of

45https://hbr.org/2014/08/employers-arent-just-whining-the-skills-gap-is-real
46https://www.usatoday.com/story/tech/talkingtech/2017/03/28/tech-skills-gap-huge-graduates-survey-

says/99587888/



29

total hours in 1980 to roughly 40% of total hours worked in 2013. Using our technology estimates,
we show in Table 5 that in the absence of price adjustments total hours worked in IT jobs in 2013
would have been over 55% of total manufacturing hours. This is significantly higher than the
40% share observed in 2013 and suggests that increases in the IT price premium have mitigated
the speed of structural employment change in manufacturing. Whether this is due to frictions
that do not allow for cost less reallocation in production or for demand in available IT positions
outstripping the supply of workers who can fill them, the result suggests that increasing IT task
price premia have been instrumental in buffeting the crowding out of non IT jobs in manufacturing.

Looking at services, the IT hours share went actually down from 41.7% in 1980 to 36.2% in
2013. This drop did not occur because of a reduction in the number of IT jobs but rather for
a more than proportional increase in the number of non IT positions. Services grew enormously
over the past decades, in both IT and non IT jobs. However, when we consider a scenario with no
price adjustments, the counterfactual share of IT jobs in 2013 jumps to 42.1%. This means that,
just like in the case of manufacturing, price adjustments have weakened the tendency to substitute
non-IT jobs with IT jobs. In the absence of these price changes, the employment structure would
have led to more IT jobs in 2013. Large structural changes in the price structure have reduced
the need for large shifts in the prevalence of IT jobs, suggesting that higher wage inequality has
had a key in preserving the role of IT jobs in the services sector.

The last counterfactual exercise looks at the role of changes in the composition of worker labor
efficiency in IT and non-IT jobs. In particular, we restrict the worker quality composition in
2013 to be the same as the one in 1980. The bottom panel of Table 5 shows that under this
counterfactual scenario the share of IT hours worked out of total hours worked in 2013 would be
significantly lower both in manufacturing (28%) and services (30%). This result indicates that the
relative quality of IT workers has been deteriorating over time, as employers presumably tried to
fill new IT positions by hiring workers with relatively less effective skills. This in turn pushed up
the number of IT hours while lowering the average worker efficiency. Restricting workers quality
to be constant requires, all else equal, that IT hours go down. Here, we allow prices to adjust,
keeping relative IT price growth to its historical values. The exercises in Table 5 suggest that
both price adjustments and workers selection have been of critical importance for the changes in
the structure of prices and employment.

[INSERT TABLE 5 HERE]

Our results point towards the importance of price adjustments over time. For example, the



30

decline in the manufacturing employment share would have been much more severe and rapid if
prices were not able to adjust. Similarly, absent growth in the productivity of IT services, prices
would not have led to a reallocation of IT workers into the services sector, which we argue may have
prevented Baumol’s cost disease from taking root in the services sector. While our model provides
insight into the competing roles of price and composition effects across sectors, we recognize that
it only provides an approximation of the full suite of dynamic general equilibrium feedback that
were present in reality. Future work should use these counterfactuals merely as heuristics to help
discipline the inclusion of occupational sorting and productivity growth across sectors.

5 The Emergence of IT-Intensive Services and Solow’s

Paradox

Traditional arguments about the increasing pervasiveness of IT point towards greater productivity
and automation in the work-place. However, as Acemoglu et al. (2014) clearly show for the U.S.
manufacturing sector, there is little systematic evidence that IT-using industries have actually
become more productive over time. While there is some evidence of faster growth in output per
worker in IT-intensive jobs, these differences are driven by a more rapid decline in labor and
a relatively constant and/or even declining level of output. For these reasons, Acemoglu et al.
(2014) conclude that Solow’s famous paradoxical statement that “...you can see the computer age
everywhere but in the productivity statistics” is far from being resolved. We revisit these issues
through the lens of our model and make two contributions: (i) we use our measure of the IT
employment share based on occupational heterogeneity to replicate Acemoglu et al. (2014) and
compare our results with those from their industrial heterogeneity measure, and (ii) we apply our
IT measure to distinguish between labor productivity growth in high and low IT industries within
both the manufacturing and services sectors.

We begin by constructing the employment share of IT workers across each three-digit industry,
comparing it with the baseline IT capital intensity measure in Acemoglu et al. (2014). We find
a (weighted) correlation of 0.46 (see Figure 12).47 One reason our measure differs from theirs is

47We also implemented another comparison by partitioning industries into high and low IT based on our measure,
as well as the measures from Acemoglu et al. (2014) over computer investment over the full sample, the SMT dummy,
and the computer investment between 1977-82. The results imply that the first measure matches our high and low
IT industries for 72% of the sample, the second measure only matches ours for 48% of the sample, and the third
measure matches ours for 64% of the sample.



31

because ours focuses on the underlying tasks that workers perform at a five-digit occupation level,
rather than measuring capital assets as in prior work (e.g., Stiroh (2002)). While we do not argue
that looking at a measure of IT-using labor is better than a measure of IT-using capital, we simply
point out that they capture different features of reality. Using our employment share of IT by
industry, we subsequently estimate regressions identical to Acemoglu et al. (2014):

yjt =
∑
t

δt(ITj × λt) + ηj + λt + �jt (11)

where y denotes the logged real value of shipments or real payroll expenditures, IT denotes a
measure of the IT intensity, η denotes three-digit industry fixed effects, and λ denotes year fixed
effects. The primary coefficients of interest in Equation 11 are the δt values, which will have a mean
of zero and characterize the deviations from trend in the return to IT intensity across industries.
We again use the baseline measure of IT intensity from Acemoglu et al. (2014), which is the share
of investment in computers (relative to total investment), together with our employment share of
IT, which denotes the share of high IT workers in a given industry.

[INSERT FIGURE 12 HERE]

Figure 13 plots the estimated δt coefficients for each year. We follow Acemoglu et al. (2014) as
closely as possible by crosswalking industries from our CPS micro-data to the three-digit industry
level, which we match into their SIC codes. We also drop the sample of industries that falls within
their “medium computer intensity” measure since those industries expand mechanically over time
due to the increasing pervasiveness of computers in the economy.48 The blue line in Figure 13
replicates their main result that IT intensity explains a decreasing share of the variation in real
shipments over time. However, the red line in Figure 13 illustrates a near opposite pattern when
using our IT intensity measure (correlation = -0.79)—that is, rising IT intensity is explaining
more of the variation in the real value of shipments. As we discussed earlier, one advantage of
our measure is that it captures variation in the utilization of different tasks within each industry,
which is important since IT skills are inherently occupation-specific.

Why do these measures produce such heterogeneous productivity profiles? Our measure focuses
on tasks (and associated human capital among the labor force) in IT jobs, whereas Acemoglu
et al. (2014) focus on a measure of physical IT capital. Hence these two measures are capturing

48These industries in the “medium” classification include: SIC 3570-3579, SIC 3660-3669, and SIC 3670-3679.
They also experiment consider a more narrow definition and a broader definition from Houseman et al. (2013).



32

systematically different phenomena. Given our earlier evidence that the manufacturing sector
exhibits greater subsitutability between IT and non-IT workers, it is precisely the industries that
invested more in physical capital at the expense of human capital that appear to have had worse
real outcomes. In sum, these differences underscore that the measurement strategy matters.

[INSERT FIGURE 13 HERE]

Motivated by these differences between our two measures, we now examine how the IT employ-
ment share affects our understanding of productivity growth in the manufacturing versus services
sectors. That is, we now estimate Equation 11 using logged real output (deflated with 2009 price
indices) as the outcome variable and the IT employment share as the IT intensity index, plotting
the estimated δt coefficients separately for the manufacturing and services sectors.49 Figure 14
highlights two important observations. First, and most importantly, whereas IT intensity explains
a relatively constant share of productivity over the past 40 years in the manufacturing sector, IT
intensity is growing rapidly in explaining the surge of productivity in the services sector. Second,
paying attention to the levels on the left and right axis, the importance of IT intensity in the
services sector surpasses the importance in the manufacturing sector even from an absolute levels
perspective. In Appendix A.4, we also plot logged value added separately for high versus low IT
and manufacturing versus services sectors. Not surprisingly, we find the bulk of the rise in value
added is accounted for by the high IT services sector, consistent with Figure 5.

[INSERT FIGURE 14 HERE]

6 Conclusion

Recent debates on the role of technology and automation for labor productivity across different jobs
have highlighted the need for new and alternative ways to describe and quantify the emergence
of information technologies in production. A particularly important manifestation of the rise
in information technology (IT) is its impact on the labor market (Autor et al., 1998) and the
organization of firms (Bresnahan et al., 2002). However, much less is known about how the
emergence of these jobs has influenced the intensity and rate of structural transformation—that
is, the move from manufacturing to services employment. The fundamental contribution in this

49We use real output since it most closely matches the real value of shipments used in Acemoglu et al. (2014).



33

paper is to provide a new measurement of IT jobs in the labor market and assess how it has shaped
sorting across jobs and the resulting sectoral distribution of price and composition effects.

We begin by documenting three facts. First, while the manufacturing sector has higher output
per worker than the services sector, it also exhibits much lower value added per worker than the
“high-tech” services sector, which has accounted for much of the services wage and employment
growth in the past few decades. Second, after introducing our new measure of IT intensity, we
classify jobs into high and low IT status and show that there are large and growing earnings and
employment premia among these job categories over the past 40 years. In fact, we show that
despite a flattening skill premium in college and cognitive/non-routine jobs after the year 2000,
there has been a continued rise in the premium among IT jobs. Third, we show that increases
in the IT employment share are associated with declines in the manufacturing share, even after
controlling for a number observable features and unobserved fixed effects.

Motivated by these observations we develop and estimate a model of production (value added)
featuring occupation heterogeneity. The model closely resembles the structure originally proposed
by Adao (2016) in a different context, explicitly allowing for self-selection into IT and non-IT
occupations. Using variation in hourly wages and the employment share of IT in 1980, we use the
model to estimate changes in the relative IT premium of price and composition (efficiency) effects
by group, geography, and sector. Using these estimated price and composition effects, we recover
key parameters in a task based value-added production technology that enable us to implement
several counterfactuals that quantify the relative importance of productivity growth in IT jobs
and how it has shaped structural transformation since 1980.

We find that the manufacturing sector has an elasticity of substitution equal to 1.62 between
IT and non-IT jobs, whereas the services sector has an elasticity of 1.31. Using our estimated
elasticities and growth in the factor shares of IT and non-IT jobs, our main result is that price
effects played a fundamental role in shaping the rate and pace of structural transformation. In
particular, we find that holding fixed growth in the factor share premium of IT jobs would have
stopped the reallocation of workers from manufacturing to IT jobs in the services sector. In other
words, absent growth in the productivity of IT jobs since 1980, any reallocation that would have
occurred in the services sector would have been directed towards non-IT jobs, which would likely
have led to much lower growth in aggregate productivity and a variant of Baumol’s cost disease.

Our results are not meant to provide a definitive conclusion on the relationship between in-
formation technology and structural transformation. Rather, we have presented the first evidence



34

on their relationship to discipline and motivate additional research questions about the ways in
which technological changes have altered labor market sorting, inequality, and human capital
across sectors. Nonetheless, we have shown that the emergence of IT jobs has had a big impact
on employment and the distribution of wages both within and across sectors. These changes may
in principle account for a non-trivial part of the increasing polarization across jobs documented
by Autor and Dorn (2013). We leave further analysis of these implications for future work.

References
Acemoglu, D., D. Autor, D. Dorn, G. H. Hanson, and B. Price (2014): “Return of the solow paradox? IT, productivity, and

employment in US manufacturing,” American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, 104, 394–399.

Acemoglu, D. and D. H. Autor (2011): “Skills, tasks and technologies: Implications for employment and earnings,” Handbook of
Labor Economics, 4b, 1043–1171.

Acemoglu, D., D. H. Autor, and D. Lyle (2004): “Women, war and wages: The effect of female labor supply on the wage structure
at midcentury,” Journal of Political Economy, 112, 497–551.

Acemoglu, D. and V. Guerrieri (2008): “Capital deepending and nonbalanced economic growth,” Journal of Political Economy,
116, 467–498.

Acemoglu, D. and P. Restrepo (2017a): “Robots and jobs: Evidence from US labor markets,” Working paper.

——— (2017b): “The race between man and machine: Implications of technology for growth, factor shares and employment,” Working
paper.

Adao, R. (2016): “Worker heterogeneity, wage inequality, and international trade: Theory and evidence from Brazil,” Working paper.

Aedo, C., J. Hentschel, J. Luque, and M. Moreno (2013): “From occupations to embedded skills: A cross-country comparison,”
Background Paper for the World Development Report.

Atalay, E., P. Phongthiengtham, S. Sotelo, and D. Tannenbaum (2017): “The evolving U.S. occupational structure: A textual
analysis,” Working paper.

Autor, D. (2014): “Skills, education and the rise of earnings inequality among the "other 99 percent",” Science, 344, 843–851.

——— (2017): “How long has this been going on?” NBER Conference on Research and Income in Wealth.

Autor, D. and D. Dorn (2013): “The Growth of Low Skill Service Jobs and the Polarization of the U.S. Labor Market,” American
Economic Review, 103, 1553–1597.

Autor, D. H. (2013): “The "task approach" to labor markets: An overview,” NBER working paper.

——— (2015): “Why are there still so many jobs? The history and future of workplace automation,” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
29, 3–30.

Autor, D. H., D. Dorn, and G. H. Hanson (2013): “The China syndrome: Local labor market effects of import competition in the
United States,” American Economic Review, 103, 2121–2168.

——— (2015): “Untangling trade and technology: Evidence from local labour markets,” Economic Journal, 125, 621–646.

Autor, D. H., L. F. Katz, and M. S. Kearney (2006): “The Polarization of the U.S. Labor Market,” American Economic Review,
96, 189–194.

——— (2008): “Trends in U.S. wage inequality: Revising the revisionists,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 90, 300–323.

Autor, D. H., L. F. Katz, and A. B. Krueger (1998): “Computing inequality: Have computers changed the labor market?” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 113, 1169–1213.

Autor, D. H., F. Levy, and R. J. Murnane (2003): “The skill content of recent technological change: An empirical exploration,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118, 1279–1333.

Barany, Z. and C. Siegel (2017): “Job polarization and structural change,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, forth-
coming.



35

Baumol, W. J. (1967): “Macroeconomics of unbalanced growth: Anatomy of an urban crisis,” American Economic Review, 57,
415–426.

Beaudry, P., D. A. Green, and B. M. Sand (2014): “The declining fortunes of the young since 2000,” American Economic Review,
104, 381–386.

——— (2016): “The Great Reversal in the demand for skill and cognitive tasks,” Journal of Labor Economics, 34, S199–S247.

Beckhusen, J. (2016): “Occupations in information technology,” American Community Survey Reports.

Bloom, N., R. Sadun, and J. Van Reenen (2012): “Americans do IT better: US multinationals and the productivity miracle,”
American Economic Review, 102, 167–201.

Boppart, T. (2014): “Structural change and the Kaldor Facts in a growth model with relative price effects and non-Gorman preferences,”
Econometrica, 82, 2167–2196.

Bresnahan, T., E. Brynjolfsson, and L. Hitt (2002): “Information technology, workplace organization and the demand for skilled
labor: firm-level evidence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117, 339–376.

Bryne, D. M., J. G. Fernald, and M. B. Reinsdorf (2016): “Does the United States have a productivity slowdown or a measurement
problem?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 109–182.

Bryne, D. M., S. Oliner, and D. E. Sichel (2013): “Is the information technology revolution over?” International Productivity
Monitor, 25, 20–36.

Brynjolfsson, E. and L. M. Hitt (2003): “Computing productivity: Firm-level evidence,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 85,
793–808.

Brynjolfsson, E. and A. McAfee (2011): “Race against the machine: How the digital revolution is accelerating innovation, driving
productivity, and irreversibly transforming employment and the economy,” Lexington, MA: Digital Frontier Press.

Buera, F. J. and J. P. Kaboski (2009): “Can traditional theories of structural transformation fit the data?” Journal of the European
Economic Association, 7, 469–477.

——— (2012): “The rise of the service economy,” American Economic Review, 102, 2540–2569.

Caballero, R. J. and M. L. Hammour (1994): “The cleansing effect of recessions,” American Economic Review, 84, 1350–1368.

Card, D. and T. Lemieux (2001): “Can falling supply explain the rising return to college for younger men? A cohort based analysis,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116, 705–746.

Charles, K. K., E. Hurst, and M. J. Notowidigdo (2016): “The masking of the decline in manufacturing employment by the
housing buble,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 30, 179–200.

Comin, D. A., D. Lashkari, and M. Mestieri (2015): “Structural change with long-run income and price effects,” Econometrica,
R&R.

Eden, M. and P. Gaggl (2017): “On the welfare implications of automation,” Working paper.

Feldstein, M. (2015): “The United States underestimates growth,” Wall Street Journal.

Frey, C. and M. A. Osborne (2013): “The future of employment: How susceptible are jobs to computerisation?” Working paper.

Gollin, D., S. Parente, and R. Rogerson (2002): “The role of agriculture in development,” American Economic Review, 92, 160–164.

Guvenen, F., B. Kuruscu, S. Tanaka, and D. Wiczer (2015): “Multidimensional skill mismatch,” NBER working paper.

Harrigan, J., A. Reshef, and F. Toubal (2016): “March of the techies: Technology, trade, and job polarization in France, 1994-2007,”
Working paper.

Hatzius, J. and K. Dawsey (2015): “Doing the sums on productivity paradox v2.0,” Goldman Sachs U.S. Economics Analyst, 15/30.

Hecker, D. (2005): “High-technology employment: A NAICS-based update,” Monthly Labor Review.

Herrendorf, B., C. Herrington, and A. Valentinyi (2015): “Sectoral technology and structural transformation,” American Eco-
nomic Journal: Macroeconomics, 7, 104–133.

Herrendorf, B., R. Rogerson, and A. Valentinyi (2013): “Two perspectives on preferences and structural transformation,” Amer-
ican Economic Review, 103, 2752–2789.

Houseman, S. N., T. Bartik, and T. Sturgeon (2013): “Measuring manufacturing: Problems of interpretation and biases in the U.S.
statistics,” Upjohn Institute.



36

Juhn, C., K. M. Murphy, and B. Pierce (1993): “Wage inequality and the rise in returns to skill,” Journal of Political Economy,
101, 410–442.

Kambourov, G. and I. Manovskii (2013): “A cautionary note on using (March) CPS and PSID data to study worker mobility,”
Macroeconomic Dynamics, 17, 172–194.

Katz, L. F. and K. M. Murphy (1992): “Changes in relative wages, 1963-1987: Supply and demand factors,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 107, 35–78.

Kongsamut, P., S. Rebelo, and D. Xie (2001): “Beyond balanced growth,” Review of Economic Studies, 68, 869–882.

Kuznets, S. (1973): “Modern economic growth: Findings and reflections,” American Economic Review, 63, 247–258.

Lemieux, T. (2006): “Increasing residual wage inequality: Composition effects, noisy data, or rising demand for skill?” American
Economic Review, 96, 461–498.

Ljungqvist, L. and T. J. Sargent (1998): “The European unemployment dilemma,” Journal of Political Economy, 106, 514–550.

——— (2008): “Two questions about European unemployment,” Econometrica, 76, 1–29.

Mokyr, J. (2014): “Secular stagnation? Not in your life,” London: CEPR Press.

Ngai, L. R. and C. A. Pissarides (2007): “Structural change in a multisector model of growth,” American Economic Review, 97,
429–443.

Roy, A. (1951): “Some thoughts on the distribution of earnings,” Oxford Economic Papers, 3, 135–146.

Stiroh, K. J. (2002): “Information technology and the U.S. productivity revival: What do the industry data say?” American Economic
Review, 92, 1559–1576.

Syverson, C. (2017): “Challenges to mismeasurement explanations for the US productivity slowdown,” Journal of Economic Perspec-
tives, 31, 165–186.

Tambe, P. and L. M. Hitt (2012): “The productivity of information technology investments: New evidence from IT labor data,”
Information Systems Research, 23, 599–617.

Valletta, R. G. (2016): “Recent flattening in the higher education wage: premium: Polarization, skill downgrading, or both?”
Education, skills, and technical change: Implications for future U.S. GDP growth.



37

7 Figures and Tables

0
50

10
0

15
0

te
ch

no
lo

gy
 in

de
x

.1
.1

5
.2

.2
5

.3
.3

5
m

an
uf

ac
tu

rin
g:

se
rv

ic
es

 e
m

pl
oy

m
en

t

1970m1 1980m1 1990m1 2000m1 2010m1 2020m1
time

manufacturing to services employment technology index

Correlation between manufacturing to services employment and tech index = −0.89

Figure 1: Structural Transformation and the Rise of Information Technology
Notes.–Sources: St. Louis Federal Reserve Board. The figure plots the ratio of manufacturing employment to services employment in
the US economy vs a well-known technology index. The Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco collects the technology index (“the
tech pulse index”) and is defined (from the FRED site) as follows: “a coincidence index of activity in the U.S. information technology
sector. The index interpreted as the health of the tech sector”. The indicators they use to construct the index are: investment in IT
goods, consumption of personal computers and software, employment in the IT sector, industrial production of the technology sector,
and shipments by the technology sector.



38

-1
-.5

0
.5

1
1.

5
ln

(a
nn

ua
l e

ar
ni

ng
s)

9.5 10 10.5 11 11.5
IT intensity, z-score

ln(earnings) =      11 +  .829 T intensity, z-score

Figure 2: Employment Share and Earnings in Information Technology Jobs
Notes.–Sources: O*NET and Census Bureau, 1980-2015. The figure plots logged annual earnings (weighted by the Census sample
weights) with the standardized information technology services intensity (weighted by employment from the BLS) at the five-digit
occupation level. Earnings are deflated using the 2010 personal consumption expenditure index and the sample is restricted to
workers earning over $5,000/year, $2/hour, and working 500 hours/year. The figure shows a strong relationship between IT intensity
and earnings in the cross-section of occupations.

4
6

8
10

ln
(IT

 c
ap

ita
l)

.2 .4 .6 .8 1
IT employment share

correlation = 0.51

Figure 3: Validating Occupation Information Technology (IT) with Capital IT
Notes.–Sources: Census Bureau, O*NET, Bureau of Economic Analysis (2000-2015). The figure plots the IT employment share at a
three-digit industry level with logged capital IT expenditures (weighted by employment from the BLS). The figure shows that there is
a 0.51 correlation between capital and labor IT inputs in the cross-section of three-digit industries (weighted by employment).



39

T
ab

le
1:

D
es
cr
ip
tiv

e
St
at
ist

ic
s
on

H
ig
h
an

d
Lo

w
In
fo
rm

at
io
n
Te

ch
no

lo
gy

W
or
ke
rs

po
ol
ed

19
70
s

19
80
s

19
90
s

20
00
s

20
10
-2
01
5

H
ig
h

Lo
w

H
ig
h

Lo
w

H
ig
h

Lo
w

H
ig
h

Lo
w

H
ig
h

Lo
w

H
ig
h

Lo
w

D
em

og
ra

ph
ic

s
fa
m
ily

siz
e

2.
9

3.
1

3.
3

3.
5

2.
9

3.
2

2.
9

3.
2

2.
8

3.
1

2.
8

3.
0

nu
m
be

r
of

ch
ild

re
n

0.
9

1.
0

1.
2

1.
3

1.
0

1.
1

0.
9

1.
0

0.
9

1.
0

0.
9

0.
9

ag
e

41
.4

40
.6

39
.3

40
.8

38
.4

38
.3

39
.4

38
.7

41
.2

40
.3

44
.1

43
.4

m
al
e

0.
47

0.
56

0.
59

0.
64

0.
52

0.
60

0.
46

0.
57

0.
45

0.
55

0.
44

0.
52

m
ar
rie

d
0.
67

0.
61

0.
75

0.
75

0.
68

0.
66

0.
68

0.
62

0.
65

0.
58

0.
65

0.
54

w
hi
te

0.
86

0.
78

0.
95

0.
85

0.
91

0.
83

0.
89

0.
79

0.
84

0.
75

0.
82

0.
73

bl
ac
k

0.
07

0.
13

0.
04

0.
14

0.
06

0.
15

0.
06

0.
13

0.
07

0.
13

0.
07

0.
14

sc
ho

ol
in
g

14
.6

11
.9

13
.7

10
.3

14
.2

11
.3

14
.4

11
.9

14
.6

12
.1

15
.0

12
.4

co
lle
ge

0.
52

0.
08

0.
36

0.
02

0.
42

0.
04

0.
46

0.
06

0.
52

0.
08

0.
62

0.
12

W
or

k
ho

ur
s
wo

rk
ed

20
52

19
48

.
.

19
57

19
08

20
16

19
46

20
72

19
72

21
02

19
55

ea
rn
in
gs

55
81
7

30
19
4

41
52
4

27
69
4

39
20
2

27
95
1

47
57
2

29
03
3

58
11
3

31
99
5

66
35
7

31
07
3

ho
ur
ly

wa
ge

27
.3

16
.0

.
.

20
.7

15
.3

23
.6

15
.2

28
.0

16
.7

31
.2

16
.2

m
an

uf
ac
tu
rin

g
0.
20

0.
38

0.
32

0.
55

0.
27

0.
50

0.
22

0.
42

0.
19

0.
35

0.
14

0.
25

se
rv
ic
es

0.
80

0.
62

0.
68

0.
45

0.
73

0.
50

0.
78

0.
58

0.
81

0.
65

0.
86

0.
75

O
bs
er
va
tio

ns
81
45
98
8

58
71
32
2

32
77
00

38
83
88

12
79
55
0

11
47
87
3

15
12
11
3

11
49
84
1

15
94
27
8

11
14
45
3

16
80
83
3

10
17
06
7

N
ot
es
.–
So

ur
ce
s:

C
en
su
s
B
ur
ea
u
an

d
O
*N

E
T
,1

97
0-
20
15
.
T
he

ta
bl
e
re
po

rt
s
su
m
m
ar
y
st
at
is
ti
cs

as
so
ci
at
ed

w
it
h
m
aj
or

de
m
og
ra
ph

ic
an

d
la
bo

r
m
ar
ke
t
va
ri
ab

le
s
fo
r
hi
gh

an
d
lo
w

in
fo
rm

at
io
n
te
ch
no

lo
gy

(I
T
)
w
or
ke
rs

by
de

ca
de

in
ou

r
m
ic
ro
-d
at
a.

T
he

va
ri
ab

le
s
“m

an
uf
ac
tu
ri
ng

”
an

d
“s
er
vi
ce
s”

re
fe
r
to

th
e
em

pl
oy

m
en
t
sh
ar
e
of

w
or
ke
rs
.
W
e

re
fe
r
to

hi
gh

IT
w
or
ke
rs

as
th
os
e
cl
as
si
fie
d
as

ab
ov
e
th
e
m
ed
ia
n
ba

se
d
on

ou
r
fiv

e-
di
gi
t
IT

in
te
ns
ity

sc
or
e.

E
ar
ni
ng

s
ar
e
de
fla

te
d
us
in
g
th
e
20
10

pe
rs
on

al
co
ns
um

pt
io
n

ex
pe

nd
it
ur
e
in
de
x
an

d
th
e
sa
m
pl
e
is

re
st
ri
ct
ed

to
w
or
ke
rs

ea
rn
in
g
ov
er

$5
,0
00
/y
ea
r,

$2
/h

ou
r,

an
d
w
or
ki
ng

50
0
ho

ur
s/
ye
ar
.



40

0
.0

2
.0

4
.0

6
.0

8
.1

de
ns

ity

−20 −10 0 10 20
skill intensity

cognitive

0
.0

5
.1

.1
5

.2
.2

5
de

ns
ity

−5 0 5 10 15
skill intensity

manual

0
.0

5
.1

.1
5

.2
de

ns
ity

−10 −5 0 5 10
skill intensity

technical

0
.0

5
.1

.1
5

de
ns

ity

−10 −5 0 5 10
skill intensity

social

0
.0

2
.0

4
.0

6
.0

8
.1

de
ns

ity

−20 −10 0 10 20
skill intensity

service

0
.0

5
.1

.1
5

de
ns

ity

−10 −5 0 5 10
skill intensity

general

High IT Low IT

Figure 4: Distribution of Skills Across Technology & Information Services Jobs
Notes.–Sources: Occupation and Employment Statistics (national) and O*NET. The figure plots the distribution of the six major
categories of skills between high and low information technology intensive jobs. The skill groups are as follows: (1) cognitive skills
(decision making, learning strategies, listening, learning, problem solving, coordination, and critical thinking), (2) manual (repairs,
equipment maintenance, equipment selection, installation, instruction), (3) technical (programming, quality control analysis, systems
analysis, systems evaluation, technology design), (4) social (persuasion, social, speaking, negotiation), (5) service (management of
financial resources, of material resources, of personnel resources, monitoring, service, operations control, operations monitoring,
operations analysis, troubleshooting), and (5) general (math, writing, time management, reading, science). The ONET skill data is
available from 2010-2014 and is made to have a mean zero and variance of 1. Occupations are harmonized to 2010 SOC codes.



41

.5
1

1.
5

2
2.

5
3

th
ou

sa
nd

s 
$,

 p
er

 w
or

ke
r

1947 1962 1977 1992 2007
year

value added per worker

1
2

3
4

5
6

th
ou

sa
nd

s 
$,

 p
er

 w
or

ke
r

1947 1962 1977 1992 2007
year

gross output per worker

manufacturing high tech services
low tech services

Figure 5: Value Added & Gross Output / Employee in Manufacturing and Services, 1947-2014
Notes.–Sources: USA KLEMS. The figure plots average value added and gross output per worker in constant dollars for
manufacturing and services sectors. High skilled services sectors cover information and financial sub-sectors, including: publishing
industries (including software), motion picture and sound recording, broadcasting and telecommunications, information and data
processing, federal reserve banks credit intermediaries, securities commodity contracts, insurance carriers, funds, trusts and other
financial vehicles, real estate, rental and leasing, legal, and computer systems design. Low skilled services sectors include wholesale /
retail trade, social assistance, and other services (typically repair).



42

0 .2 .4 .6 .8
earnings premia

2013

2005

2000

1990

1980

1970

Panel A: Earnings

manufacturing services

-.8 -.6 -.4 -.2 0
employment premia

2013

2005

2000

1990

1980

1970

Panel B: Employment

manufacturing services

Figure 6: Earnings and Employment Premia to Information Technology, 1970-2015
Notes.–Sources: Census Bureau and O*NET, 1970-2015. Panel A plots the logged (average) annual earnings among IT workers net of
logged annual earnings among non-IT workers (weighted by Census sample weights to produce the average) in the manufacturing and
services sector. Earnings is deflated using the 2010 personal consumption expenditures index and the sample is restricted to workers
earning over $5,000/year, $2/hour, and working 500 hours/year. Panel B plots the logged total number of IT workers net of the
logged total number of non-IT workers. IT workers are classified as those in an occupation with an IT intensity score above the
median in the distribution of five-digit occupations. The figure shows the growing earnings premium and declining employment
premium (i.e., growing employment share) of IT workers.



43

0 .2 .4 .6 .8
earnings premia

2013-2015

2005-2007

2000s

1990s

1980s

1970s

panel A: examining the college premium

college premium (among IT) college premium (overall)

0 .2 .4 .6 .8
earnings premia

2013-2015

2005-2007

2000s

1990s

1980s

1970s

panel B: examining the C/NR premium

C/NR premium (among IT) C/NR premium (overall)

Figure 7: Examining Heterogeneity in the Demand for Skills in High and Low IT Jobs
Notes.–Sources: Census Bureau and O*NET, 1970-2015. Panel A plots the logged (average) earnings among IT and college workers
net of earnings among non-college workers (in blue) with the logged (average) earnings among college workers net of logged earnings
among non-college workers (in red), showing a more rapid increase among the college+IT premium, relative to the pure college
premium. Panel B implements an analogous comparison, but uses cognitive and non-routine skills classified at the five-digit
occupation level based on whether the intensity is above or below the median. Earnings are deflated using the 2010 personal
consumption expenditure index and the sample is restricted to workers earning over $5,000/year, $2/hour, and working 500
hours/year. All aggregations from the Census are produced using sample weights.



44

0
.0

2
.0

4
.0

6
.0

8
re

tu
rn

 o
n 

co
lle

ge
 a

nd
 IT

 s
ta

tu
s

2005 2010 2015
year

panel A: return to IT + college

.2
8

.3
.3

2
.3

4
.3

6
re

tu
rn

 o
n 

C
/N

R
 a

nd
 IT

 s
ta

tu
s

2005 2010 2015
year

panel B: return to IT + C/NR

Figure 8: Return to IT and College / C/NR Skills, 2005-2015
Notes.–Sources: Census Bureau and O*NET, 2005-2015. Panel A plots the coefficient associated with the college × high IT status
interactions from regressions of logged annual earnings on college attainment, high IT status, and their interaction separately by year.
Panel B implements an analogous comparison, but uses cognitive and non-routine skills classified at the five-digit occupation level
based on whether the intensity is above or below the median. Earnings are deflated using the 2010 personal consumption expenditure
index and the sample is restricted to workers earning over $5,000/year, $2/hour, and working 500 hours/year. Regression estimates
are weighted using sample weights and standard errors are clustered at the five-digit occupation level.



45

Table 2: The Rise of the Information Technology Employment Share and Structural Change

Dep. var. = manufacturing employment share
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)

IT share -.54∗∗∗ -.17 -.37∗∗∗ -.36∗∗∗ -.83∗∗∗
[.07] [.11] [.07] [.10] [.23]

ln(wage) .11∗∗∗ .13∗∗∗ .14∗∗∗
[.03] [.03] [.03]

male .79∗∗∗ .45∗∗∗ .80∗∗∗
[.10] [.10] [.18]

white .15∗∗∗ -.04 .21∗∗∗
[.02] [.03] [.03]

college -.33∗∗∗ -.21∗∗∗ .09
[.07] [.07] [.12]

R-squared .13 .44 .93 .94 .26
Sample Size 1455 1455 1455 1455 1114
Controls No Yes No Yes Yes
County FE No No Yes Yes No
Year FE No No Yes Yes No
Instrument? No No No No Yes

Notes.–Sources: Census Bureau, 1980-2015. The table reports the coefficients of the manufacturing employment share at a
county-level on the IT employment share, conditional on the logged hourly wage, share of males, share of whites, and share of
college degree workers. Fixed effects are included on county and year. The instrumental variable specification in column 5 uses
the 1980 share of IT workers to predict future IT growth. Regression estimates are unweighted and standard errors are clustered
at the county-level. The sample is restricted to workers earning over $5,000/year, $2/hour, and working 500 hours/year



46

0
1

2
3

de
ns

ity

-1 -.5 0 .5
growth rate

IT = 0.05 and non-IT = -0.09

Panel A: Manufacturing, Price Growth

0
1

2
3

4
dl

w
ag

e_
ho

ur
ly

_n
itm

-.5 0 .5 1 1.5
growth rate

IT = 0.01 and non-IT = 0.17

Panel B: Manufacturing, Composition Growth
0

.5
1

1.
5

2
2.

5
de

ns
ity

-.4 -.2 0 .2 .4
growth rate

IT = 0.03 and non-IT = -0.03

Panel C: Services, Price Growth

0
1

2
3

4
dl

w
ag

e_
ho

ur
ly

_n
itm

-.2 0 .2 .4 .6
growth rate

IT = 0.03 and non-IT = 0.08

Panel D: Services, Composition Growth

high IT low IT

Figure 9: Distribution of Labor Services Price in IT and non-IT Jobs
Notes.–Sources: Census Bureau (1990, 2000, and 2013-2015 one-year waves). The figure plots the distributions of the price and
composition effects pooling across group, region, and year separately for manufacturing / services sectors and college / non-college
graduates. Price effects are estimated from the following regression
∆Yg,r,t(π) = ∆ωITg,r,t +

[
∆ωNITg,r,t − ∆ωITg,r,t

]
lNITg,r,t0 (π) + µg,r,tXg,r,t(π) + ∆νg,r,t(π) for t0 = 1980. Controls include: the age

distribution (fraction of people between ages 20-29, 30-39, 40-49, 50-65), marital status, race, gender, and dummies on the bottom,
middle, and top of the wage distribution. Composition effects are obtained by taking the ratio of the gross wage growth and the price
effects.



47

0.205 − 0.372
0.122 − 0.205
0.059 − 0.122
0.002 − 0.059
-0.062 − 0.002
-0.305 − -0.062

Panel A: Manufacturing Sector IT Premium (1980-1990)

0.205 − 0.576
0.122 − 0.205
0.059 − 0.122
0.002 − 0.059
-0.062 − 0.002
-0.147 − -0.062

Panel B: Services Sector IT Premium (1980-1990)

0.205 − 0.706
0.122 − 0.205
0.059 − 0.122
0.002 − 0.059
-0.062 − 0.002
-0.438 − -0.062

Panel C: Manufacturing Sector IT Premium (1990-2000)

0.205 − 0.275
0.122 − 0.205
0.059 − 0.122
0.002 − 0.059
-0.062 − 0.002
-0.271 − -0.062

Panel D: Services Sector IT Premium (1990-2000)

0.205 − 0.531
0.122 − 0.205
0.059 − 0.122
0.002 − 0.059
-0.062 − 0.002
-0.176 − -0.062

Panel E: Manufacturing Sector IT Premium (2000-2015)

0.205 − 0.457
0.122 − 0.205
0.059 − 0.122
0.002 − 0.059
-0.062 − 0.002
-0.347 − -0.062

Panel F: Services Sector IT Premium (2000-2015)

Figure 10: Spatial Heterogeneity in the Growth in the IT Price Premium
Notes.–Sources: Census Bureau (1990, 2000, 2013-2015 waves). The figure plots the state-level weighted averages (based on the
number of observations per cell) of the price of labor services, denoted ∆ωIT and ∆ωNIT , separately for manufacturing and services
sectors. Averages are weighted by the number of observations in each of the cells.



48

Services Manufacturing
1/(1− νi) Elasticities of substitution

1.310 (0.042) 1.627 (0.056)
∆ ln[αi/(1− αi)] Value Shares

0.736 (0.009) 0.163 (0.614)

Table 3: Elasticity of Substitution between IT and non-IT Labor
Notes.–Sources: Census Bureau, 1980-2015. The table reports the coefficients associated with projections of the growth in the price of
IT labor relative to non-IT labor on the growth of the ratio of quality-adjusted IT labor relative to non-IT labor:

∆t
(
ωITi − ω

NIT
i

)
= ∆t ln (αi/(1 − αi)) + (νi − 1)∆t ln

(
HITi /H

NIT
i

)
+ νi∆t

(
εITi /ε

NIT
i

)
where we restrict the elasticity to be time-invariant. We also control for two wage dummies for where individuals lie in the wage
distribution, age dummies for the share of workers in different (g, r, t) cells in the age distribution, the share who are male, married,
and white.



49

-1
.5-

1-
.5

0
.5

1
ac

tu
al

-1.5 -1 -.5 0 .5 1
predicted

r-squared =     .85

Panel A: Manufacturing, 1990

-1
-.5

0
.5

1
ac

tu
al

-1 -.5 0 .5 1
predicted

r-squared =     .79

Panel B: Manufacturing, 2000
-1

-.5
0

.5
ac

tu
al

-1 -.5 0 .5
predicted

r-squared =     .84

Panel C: Manufacturing, 2013

-.8
-.6

-.4
-.2

0
.2

ac
tu

al

-.8 -.6 -.4 -.2 0 .2
predicted

r-squared =      .8

Panel D: Services, 1990

-.4
-.2

0
.2

.4
ac

tu
al

-.4 -.2 0 .2 .4
predicted

r-squared =     .79

Panel E: Services, 2000
-.8

-.6
-.4

-.2
0

.2
ac

tu
al

-.6 -.4 -.2 0 .2
predicted

r-squared =     .86

Panel F: Services, 2013

Figure 11: Comparison Human Capital Premium Growth, Data and Model
Notes.–Sources: Census Bureau and O*NET, 2000-2014. The figure plots the actual and predicted values for the ratio of marginal
product growth rates between IT and non-IT workers in the manufacturing and services sector where the predicted values are
obtained from the following projection:

∆t
(
ωITi − ω

NIT
i

)
= ∆t ln (αi/(1 − αi)) + (νi − 1)∆t ln

(
HITi /H

NIT
i

)
+ νi∆t

(
εITi /ε

NIT
i

)
.

where we restrict the elasticity to be time-invariant. We also control for two wage dummies for where individuals lie in the wage
distribution, age dummies for the share of workers in different (g, r, t) cells in the age distribution, the share who are male, married,
and white. We subsequently use these estimated coefficients to recover the human capital (the product of composition and aggregate
hours) premium growth.



50

Manufacturing Services
Year Price ratio (IT vs non IT) Price ratio (IT vs non IT)

Actual Counterfactual Actual Counterfactual
No Change in Worker Efficiency wIT/wNIT wIT/wNIT wIT/wNIT wIT/wNIT

1980 1.092 — 1.089 —
2013 1.636 1.277 1.313 1.136

No Change in Hours Worked wIT/wNIT wIT/wNIT wIT/wNIT wIT/wNIT
1980 1.092 — 1.089 —
2013 1.636 1.800 1.313 1.100

No Change in Factor Shares wIT/wNIT wIT/wNIT wIT/wNIT wIT/wNIT
1980 1.092 — 1.089 —
2013 1.636 1.041 1.313 0.040

Table 4: Counterfactual Changes to Assess the Gross IT Price Premia
Notes.–Using estimates of our comparative advantage model, we simulate three counterfactuals, which hold fixed the change in worker
efficiency, hours worked, and factor shares. We simulate the counterfactual price effects in each of these cases and fix the baseline
1980 price premium level, extrapolating forward using subsequent decadal growth rates.

Share of IT hours in total hours worked (%)
Set ∆(ωIT − ωNIT ) = 0 (no price changes) Manufacturing Services

1980 (actual) 36.4% 41.7%
2013 (actual) 39.8% 36.2%

2013 (counterfactual) 55.3% 42.1%
Set ∆ln(EIT/ENIT ) = 0 (no quality changes) Manufacturing Services

1980 (actual) 36.4% 41.7%
2013 (actual) 39.8% 36.2%

2013 (counterfactual) 28.1% 30.9%

Table 5: Counterfactual Changes in the Information Technology Employment Share
Notes.–Using estimates of our comparative advantage model, we simulate two counterfactuals. The first computes the counterfactual
changes in aggregate hours that would be consistent with no change in the relative price of IT to non-IT jobs. The second computes
the counterfactual changes when holding the composition of worker quality in 2013 fixed according to 1980.



51

-2
0

2
4

6
co

m
pu

te
r i

nv
es

tm
en

t, 
z-

sc
or

e

.2 .4 .6 .8
employment share in IT

gradient on IT employment share = 2.89 and correlation = 0.46

Figure 12: Comparison of Physical Computer Investment and Employment IT Shares
Notes.–Sources: Current Population Survey and Acemoglu et al. (2014), 1970-2009. The figure plots the share of computer investment
relative to total (using Acemoglu et al. (2014)) with the employment share of IT (using the baseline O*NET measure) at a three-digit
industry level of aggregation. Observations are weighted by the number of individuals in each three-digit industry cell obtained from
the CPS. The figure shows a positive correlation between computer investment and IT workers in the cross-section of industries.



52

-1
0

1
2

3
4

O
N

ET
 m

ea
su

re

-.4
-.2

0
.2

AA
D

H
P 

m
ea

su
re

1980 1990 2000 2010
year

AADHP measure ONET measure

Figure 13: IT Intensity and Real Value of Shipments, AADHP and O*NET Measure
Notes.–Sources: Current Population Survey (1970-2009) and Acemoglu et al. (2014). The figure plots the coefficient on the
interaction between the IT intensity measure and year dummies (normalized to 1980 as zero) from regressions of logged real value
added and real payroll expenditures on year dummies, three-digit census industry dummies, and the interaction between IT and year
dummies. Standard errors are clustered at the industry level and observations are weighted by the industry employment share.



53

0
1

2
3

se
rv

ic
es

-4
-2

0
2

4
6

m
an

uf
ac

tu
rin

g

1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
year

manufacturing services

Figure 14: IT Intensity and Real Output, Manufacturing and Services
Notes.–Sources: Current Population Survey and Bureau of Economic Analysis, 1970-2016. Consider the following regression:
yjt = α+ λt +

∑
t
δt(ITj × λt) + ηj + �jt. The figure plots the coefficients associated with the interaction, δt, separately for

manufacturing and services sectors. The outcome variable is real gross output, which is deflated using 2009 price indices. IT denotes
the employment share of IT at a three-digit NAICS level of aggregation between 1970 and 2015. Standard errors are clustered at the
industry level and observations are weighted by average employment between 1998-2015.

A Online Appendix (Not for Print)

A.1 Supplement to Data and Measurement

A.1.1 Supplement to Measuring IT Workers

We use a combination of input data from O*NET on the underlying tasks, knowledge, and skills
workers use at a six-digit level of occupational heterogeneity.

Computers and Electronics (knowledge): Knowledge of circuit boards, processors, chips,
electronic equipment, and computer hardware and software, including applications and program-
ming Question: What level of COMPUTERS AND ELECTRONICS is needed to perform your
current job? 1 (lowest level): Operate a VCR to watch a pre -recorded training tape 4 (interme-
diate): Use a word processor 6 (high): Create a program to scan computer disks for viruses.

Interacting with computers (work activity): Using computers and computer systems (in-
cluding hardware and software) to program, write software, set up functions, enter data, or process



54

information. Question: What level of WORKINGWITH COMPUTERS is needed to perform your
current job? 1 (lowest level): Enter employee information into a computer database 4 (interme-
diate): Write software for keeping track of parts in inventory 6 (high): Set up a new computer
system for a large multinational company.

Programming (skills): Writing computer programs for various purposes Question: What level
of PROGRAMMING is needed to perform your current job? 1 (lowest level): Write a program
in BASIC to sort objects in a database 4 (intermediate): Write a statistical analysis program
to analyze demographic data 6 (high): Write expert system programs to analyze ground radar
geological data for probable existence of mineral deposits.

System (skill): Evaluation Identifying measures or indicators of system performance and the
actions needed to improve or correct performance, relative to the goals of the system Question:
What level of SYSTEMS EVALUATION is needed to perform your current job? 1 (lowest level):
Determine why a coworker has been overly optimistic about how long it would take to complete a
task 4 (intermediate): Identify the major reasons why a client might be unhappy with a product
6 (high): Evaluate the long-term performance problem of a new computer system.

Quality control analysis (skill): Conducting tests and inspections of products, services,
or processes to evaluate quality or performance Question: What level of QUALITY CONTROL
ANALYSIS is needed to perform your current job? 1 (lowest level): Inspect a draft memorandum
for clerical errors 4 (intermediate): Measure new part requisitions for tolerance to specifications 6
(high): Develop procedures to test a prototype of a new computer system.

Operations analysis (skill): Analyzing needs and product requirements to create a design
Question: What level of OPERATIONS ANALYSIS is needed to perform your current job? 1
(lowest level): Select a photocopy machine for an office 4 (intermediate): Suggest changes in
software to make a system more user friendly 6 (high): Identify the control system needed for a
new process production plant.

Updating and using Relevant knowledge (work activity): Keeping up-to-date technically
and applying new knowledge to your job Question: What level of UPDATING AND USING
RELEVANT KNOWLEDGE is needed to perform your current job? 1 (lowest level): Keep up
with price changes in a small retail store 4 (intermediate): Keep current on changes in maintenance
procedures for repairing sports cars 6 (high): Learn information related to a complex and rapidly
changing technology.

Technology design (skill): Generating or adapting equipment and technology to serve user



55

needs. Question: What level of TECHNOLOGY DESIGN is needed to perform your current job?
1 (lowest level): Adjust exercise equipment for use by a customer 4 (intermediate): Redesign the
handle on a hand tool for easier gripping 6 (high): Create new technology for producing industrial
diamonds.

Analyzing Data or Information (work activity): Identifying the underlying principles, rea-
sons, or facts of information by breaking down information or data into separate parts. Question:
What level of ANALYZING DATA OR INFORMATION is needed to perform your current job?
1 (lowest level): Determine the location of a lost order 4: (intermediate): Determine the interest
cost to finance a new building 6: (high): Analyze the cost of medical care services for all hospitals
in the country.

Processing Information (work activity): Compiling, coding, categorizing, calculating, tab-
ulating, auditing, or verifying information or data. Question: 1 (lowest level): Tabulate the costs
of parcel deliveries 4: (intermediate): Calculate the adjustments for insurance claims 6: (high):
Compile data for a complex scientific report.

Engineering and technology (knowledge): Knowledge of the practical application of en-
gineering science and technology. This includes applying principles, techniques, procedures, and
equipment to the design and production of various goods and services. Question: What level of
knowledge of ENGINEERING AND TECHNOLOGY is needed to perform your current job? 1
(lowest level): Install a door lock 4: (intermediate): Design a more stable grocery cart 6: (high):
Plan for the impact of weather in designing a bridge.

Management of Material Resources: Obtaining and seeing to the appropriate use of
equipment, facilities, and materials needed to do certain work. Question: What level of MAN-
AGEMENT OF MATERIAL RESOURCES is needed to perform your current job? 1 (lowest
level): Rent a meeting room for a management meeting 4: (intermediate): Evaluate an annual
uniform service contract for delivery drivers 6: (high): Determine the computer system needs of
a large corporation and monitor use of the equipment.

For completeness, we also compare our measure with an alternative approach from the Census
(see Beckhusen (2016)). While his approach is much more restrictive in its definition of occu-
pations, it shows a stark trend upwards in the number and shares of workers in IT-intensive
occupations; see Figure 15. We report these time series merely as a heuristic for comparison.



56

.5
1

1.
5

2
2.

5
3

em
pl

oy
m

en
t, 

in
 p

er
ce

nt

0
10

00
20

00
30

00
40

00
50

00
em

pl
oy

m
en

t, 
in

 th
ou

sa
nd

s

1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
year

employment count in IT employment share in IT

Figure 15: Information Technology Workers, 1970-2014
Notes.–Sources: See Beckhusen (2016) for calculations. Occupation codes were harmonized to the 2010 census classification.

A.1.2 Supplement to Descriptive Statistics

The main text presents regressions of various outcome measures (e.g., logged hourly wage) on
IT intensity. While these coefficients characterize the conditional mean, we now explore the
distribution of these outcomes in occupations with high and low IT, displayed in Figure 16. There
is a remarkable difference in the distribution of hourly wages between jobs with more versus less
IT intensity. The difference in employment between the two is more subtle, but the difference in
inequality between the two is evident.



57

0
.5

1
1.

5
de

ns
ity

2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5
logged median hourly wage

0
.1

.2
.3

de
ns

ity

6 8 10 12 14 16
logged employment

0
.5

1
1.

5
2

2.
5

de
ns

ity

0 .5 1 1.5 2 2.5
logged 90−10 hourly wage ineq ratio

0
1

2
3

4
de

ns
ity

0 .5 1 1.5
logged 75−25 hourly wage ineq ratio

High IT Low IT

Figure 16: Distribution of Hourly Wages, Employment, and Inequality, by IT Intensity
Notes.–Sources: Bureau of Labor Statistics Occupation and Employment Statistics (national) tables. The first figure plots the
distribution of logged median hourly wages and employment for high and low IT-intensive occupation. The second figure plots the
distribution of the logged 90-10 and 75-25 median hourly wage inequality ratios for high and low IT-intensive occupation.

We subsequently examine the cross-sectional differences in earnings and employment premia
by major industry. Figure 17 plots logged income in IT-intensive jobs net of income in non-IT-
intensive jobs, together with the IT employment share, separately by major industry, using the
Census for two year groups (1980-1989 and 2000-2015). The first observation is that, whereas in
some industries there is a very small premium (e.g., wholesale), in others there is a high premium.
For example, in finance, insurance, and real estate, IT-intensive workers earn approximately 70%
more than their counterparts. While both FIRE and manufacturing sectors have similar IT income
premia, the employment share of IT workers is much greater in FIRE than it is in manufacturing
(e.g., 40% versus 25%). The second observation is that, although the employment premia are
relatively stable between time periods (that is, high IT industries today had high IT in the 1980s),
the earnings premia have grown dramatically over the past decade. For example, the mean IT
earnings premium was 0.32 between 1980-1989, but it grew to 0.68 between 2000-2015. In contrast,
the employment premia only grew by about one percentage point on average (from 0.491 to 0.503).



58

.2
.4

.6
.8

1
lo

gg
ed

 d
iff

er
en

ce

Ag
ric

ult
ur

e

Co
ns

tru
cti

on

M
an

uf
ac

tu
rin

g

Tr
an

sp
or

t/U
tili

tie
s

W
ho

les
ale

Re
ta

il

FI
RE

Bi
z S

er
vic

es

Pr
o 

Se
rv

ice
s

industry

IT income premium, 1980−9

.2
.4

.6
.8

1
pe

rc
en

t

Ag
ric

ult
ur

e

Co
ns

tru
cti

on

M
an

uf
ac

tu
rin

g

Tr
an

sp
or

t/U
tili

tie
s

W
ho

les
ale

Re
ta

il

FI
RE

Bi
z S

er
vic

es

Pr
o 

Se
rv

ice
s

industry

IT employment share, 1980−9

.2
.4

.6
.8

1
lo

gg
ed

 d
iff

er
en

ce

Ag
ric

ult
ur

e

Co
ns

tru
cti

on

M
an

uf
ac

tu
rin

g

Tr
an

sp
or

t/U
tili

tie
s

W
ho

les
ale

Re
ta

il

FI
RE

Bi
z S

er
vic

es

Pr
o 

Se
rv

ice
s

industry

IT income premium, 2000−15

.2
.4

.6
.8

1
pe

rc
en

t

Ag
ric

ult
ur

e

Co
ns

tru
cti

on

M
an

uf
ac

tu
rin

g

Tr
an

sp
or

t/U
tili

tie
s

W
ho

les
ale

Re
ta

il

FI
RE

Bi
z S

er
vic

es

Pr
o 

Se
rv

ice
s

industry

IT employment share, 2000−15

Figure 17: Earnings and Employment Premia, by Industry and Year Group
Notes.–Sources: Census Bureau and O*NET. The figures plot the logged IT earnings premium obtained by taking logged labor
income in IT-intensive jobs net of logged labor income from non-IT-intensive jobs across, and the IT employment share, both across
industries.

A.1.3 Controlling for Skill Intensity (Robustness)

The main text presents evidence showing that hourly wages are significantly higher in jobs with
high IT intensity, relative to low intensity. However, once concern is that IT intensity is simply
correlated with other valuable skills through selection channels. We address this concern by
exploiting cross-sectional variation through hedonic regressions of the form

yot = αskillo + γtITo + ψo′ + �ot (12)

where y denotes our outcome variable of interest (logged employment, inequality, and hourly
wages), skill denotes a vector of occupation-specific skills, IT denotes the intensity of information
technology, and ψo′ denotes fixed effects on four-digit occupation cells. We present two main
sets of estimates for Equation 12: unconditional and conditional correlations. The conditional
correlation estimates illustrate that the return to IT intensity is large, even after controlling for



59

the skill content associated to different tasks. These fixed effect estimates also illustrate that the
wage premium persists after controlling for non-random sorting of different workers into different
occupations at a detailed four-digit level.

Table 6 documents these results. Beginning with the logged hourly wage as the outcome vari-
able, the unconditional correlation estimate suggests that a standard deviation rise in information
technology is associated with a large 0.45% rise in the median logged hourly wage. The estimate is
still statistically and economically significant after introducing detailed measures of skill intensity
and four-digit fixed effects. Importantly, IT intensity is approximately half as large in magnitude
as the association between hourly wages and non-routine & cognitive skills, which suggests that
IT intensity is not merely proxying for high skilled occupations. We also find that, in the cross-
section, a standard deviation increase in IT intensity is associated with a large 0.57% decline in
occupational employment and a 0.12% rise in the 90-10 logged hourly wage difference.

While the employment and inequality differences between IT and non-IT jobs are stark in
the cross-section, the become statistically insignificant once we control for four-digit occupation
and year fixed effects. Only an hourly wage premium remains: a standard deviation rise in IT
intensity is associated with a 0.13% rise in the hourly wage. We also underscore the fact that
these regressions that control for occupation and year fixed effects also contain the standard set
of skill intensity measures from the skill-biased technical change literature (Acemoglu and Autor,
2011). Strikingly, a standard deviation rise in non-routine and cognitive skills is associated with
almost as large of an increase in the hourly wage as a proportional increase in IT intensity—0.12
for non-routine & cognitive versus 0.13 for IT. We also find that an increase in non-routine &
cognitive is associated with a statistically significant decline in employment and a statistically
significant rise in inequality, consistent with early evidence from Autor et al. (2003).

A.1.4 Time Series Variation in IT Intensity

We provide a brief characterization of the time series heterogeneity in aggregate IT intensity by
plotting the evolution of each of its sub-components between 2000 and 2016, weighted by each six-
digit occupation’s employment from the Occupational Employment Statistics (OES) data. Table
7 reports the mean and standard deviation of each input intensity over time. Across most of the
categories, the intensity is growing and generally matches our intuition about the types of tasks
that have become more common, such as processing information, analyzing data, and task related
to engineering and technology. However, dispersion in the intensity is staying roughly constant



60

Table 6: Hedonic Skill and Information Technology Regressions

Dep. var. = logged hourly wage logged employment logged 90-10 ratio
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)

information technology .45∗∗∗ .13∗∗∗ -.57∗∗∗ .02 .12∗∗∗ .00
[.02] [.02] [.10] [.09] [.02] [.01]

non-routine, cognitive .12∗∗∗ -.28∗∗∗ .05∗∗∗
[.02] [.11] [.02]

non-routine, non-cognitive -.02 .06 -.01
[.02] [.08] [.02]

routine, cognitive .04∗∗∗ -.05 .01
[.01] [.06] [.01]

routine, manual -.02 -.14 -.09∗∗∗
[.02] [.12] [.03]

non-routine, manual .03 .17 .04∗
[.03] [.12] [.02]

R-squared .63 .92 .13 .64 .22 .73
Sample Size 6897 6897 7516 7516 6979 6979
Controls No Yes No Yes No Yes
4-dig Occupation FE No Yes No Yes No Yes
Year FE No Yes No Yes No Yes
Notes.–Sources: Occupation and Employment Statistics (BLS) and O*NET, 2004-2015. The table reports the coefficients
associated with regressions of logged employment, median hourly wages, and the logged 90-10 hourly wage differential on a
standardized measure of IT intensity and standardized measures of skills following the strategy in Acemoglu and Autor (2011).
Standard errors are clustered at the six-digit occupation level.



61

across most categories.
We now provide another way of characterizing the heterogeneity more visually. In particular,

looking at the mean IT intensity might confound heterogeneity in the distribution of IT intensity
across occupations. While the main text provides some useful heuristics that display the average
IT intensity over time, it confounds a significant amount of heterogeneity across 773 unique six-
digit occupations. Figure 18, therefore, plots the distribution of each input to the aggregate index
in both 2004-2006 and 2014-2016 time periods. While a few of the distributions are relatively time
invariant (e.g., quality control and programming), many distributions exhibit interesting changes.
For example, both the “computers & electronics” and “interaction with computers” categories
grow in both mean and skewness.

0
.0

2.
04

.0
6.

08
de

ns
ity

0 5 10 15 20 25
intensity index

computers & electronics

0
.1

.2
.3

de
ns

ity

0 5 10 15 20 25
intensity index

quality control

0
.0

2.0
4.0

6.0
8

de
ns

ity

0 5 10 15 20 25
intensity index

interact w/ computers

0
.0

5
.1

.1
5

de
ns

ity

0 5 10 15 20
intensity index

operations analysis

0
.2

.4
.6

de
ns

ity

0 5 10 15
intensity index

programming
0

.0
2

.0
4

.0
6

de
ns

ity

0 10 20 30
intensity index

relevant knowledgle

0
.0

5
.1

.1
5

de
ns

ity

0 5 10 15 20
intensity index

system evaluation

0
.1

.2
.3

.4
de

ns
ity

0 5 10 15 20
intensity index

technology design

.0
05

.0
1.

01
5.

02
de

ns
ity

0 20 40 60 80 100
intensity index

email

2004−06 2014−16

Figure 18: Distribution of Inputs to Information Technology Intensity
Notes.–Sources: O*NET. The figure plots the intensity of the nine inputs to the aggregate information technology (IT) index from
2004 to 2016. The annual measures are weighted across six-digit occupations using average employment from the Occupation
Employment Statistics (OES).

A.2 Supplemental Stylized Facts



62

T
ab

le
7:

T
im

e
Se
rie

s
of

Te
ch
no

lo
gy

an
d
In
fo
rm

at
io
n
Se
rv
ic
es

In
pu

ts

20
04

-2
00

5
20

06
-2
00

7
20

08
-2
00

9
20

10
-2
01

1
20

12
-2
01

3
20

14
-2
01

5
M
ea
n

S.
D
.

M
ea
n

S.
D
.

M
ea
n

S.
D
.

M
ea
n

S.
D
.

M
ea
n

S.
D
.

M
ea
n

S.
D
.

co
m
pu

te
rs

an
d
el
ec
tr
on

ic
s

6.
4

4.
9

7.
3

5.
0

7.
5

5.
0

8.
2

5.
6

8.
6

5.
9

8.
8

5.
9

dr
af
tin

g
2.
2

3.
2

2.
4

3.
3

2.
7

3.
5

2.
8

3.
7

2.
9

3.
6

2.
8

3.
5

in
te
ra
ct
in
g
w
ith

co
m
pu

te
rs

8.
3

6.
1

8.
5

6.
0

8.
9

6.
0

9.
6

6.
1

10
.1

6.
2

10
.4

6.
2

op
er
at
io
ns

an
al
ys
is

4.
6

4.
0

5.
8

4.
2

4.
8

3.
9

3.
5

3.
6

3.
4

3.
6

3.
2

3.
4

pr
og

ra
m
m
in
g

1.
2

2.
1

1.
4

1.
7

1.
4

1.
6

1.
0

2.
0

1.
2

2.
4

1.
2

2.
3

re
le
va
nt

kn
ow

le
dg

e
12

.2
6.
2

12
.6

5.
8

13
.0

5.
8

13
.9

5.
8

14
.3

5.
8

14
.4

5.
8

sy
st
em

s
ev
al
ua

tio
n

5.
3

3.
8

5.
1

3.
6

5.
3

3.
7

5.
7

3.
6

6.
0

3.
6

6.
0

3.
6

te
ch
no

lo
gy

an
d
de

sig
n

2.
9

2.
9

4.
2

3.
4

3.
7

3.
1

1.
2

1.
6

1.
4

1.
8

1.
4

1.
7

en
gi
ne

er
in
g
an

d
te
ch
no

lo
gy

2.
8

4.
5

3.
2

4.
6

3.
4

5.
0

3.
7

5.
0

3.
7

4.
9

3.
7

4.
8

m
an

ag
in
g
re
so
ur
ce
s

4.
1

3.
4

5.
2

3.
9

4.
8

3.
6

2.
9

2.
6

2.
9

2.
5

2.
9

2.
5

an
al
yz
in
g
da

ta
8.
8

5.
8

8.
4

5.
4

8.
7

5.
6

9.
4

5.
8

9.
9

5.
8

10
.0

5.
8

pr
oc
es
sin

g
in
fo
rm

at
io
n

10
.8

5.
6

11
.1

5.
4

11
.5

5.
5

12
.0

5.
6

12
.3

5.
5

12
.5

5.
5

O
bs
er
va
tio

ns
13

81
13

76
13

89
14

51
15

20
15

40
N
ot
es
.–
So

ur
ce
s:

O
*N

E
T
.T

he
ta
bl
e
re
po

rt
s
th
e
m
ea
ns

an
d
st
an

da
rd

de
vi
at
io
ns

of
ea
ch

in
fo
rm

at
io
n
te
ch
no

lo
gy

su
b-
in
de
x
at

a
si
x-
di
gi
t
le
ve
lo

fo
cc
up

at
io
n
ag
gr
eg
at
io
n

w
ei
gh

te
d
by

em
pl
oy

m
en
t.



63

A.2.1 Supplement to Sectoral Heterogeneity

The main text discusses the importance of purging variation in intermediates goods when exam-
ining relative productivity differences between the manufacturing and services sectors. One of the
reasons doing so is especially important in our setting is because the rise of IT jobs is potentially
shaping these aggregate phenomena beyond mere composition effects. While we do not have causal
evidence, Figure 19 plots correlations between the employment share in IT jobs and growth in
value added, logged value added, logged earnings, and the intermediates share. There is a positive
gradient in each case except for the last—industries with higher IT employment shares have lower
intermediates shares.

-.0
5

0
.0

5
.1

te
ch

no
lo

gy
 a

nd
 in

fo
rm

at
io

n 
se

rv
ic

es
, s

ha
re

0 .2 .4 .6 .8
value added, growth rate

regression coefficient = 0.04

value added growth

10
11

12
13

14
te

ch
no

lo
gy

 a
nd

 in
fo

rm
at

io
n 

se
rv

ic
es

, s
ha

re

0 .2 .4 .6 .8
ln(value added)

regression coefficient = 1.29

ln(value added)

9.
5

10
10

.5
11

te
ch

no
lo

gy
 a

nd
 in

fo
rm

at
io

n 
se

rv
ic

es
, s

ha
re

0 .2 .4 .6 .8
ln(earnings)

regression coefficient = 1.23

ln(earnings)

.3
.4

.5
.6

.7
.8

te
ch

no
lo

gy
 a

nd
 in

fo
rm

at
io

n 
se

rv
ic

es
, s

ha
re

0 .2 .4 .6 .8
intermediates / gross output

regression coefficient = -0.07

intermediates share

Figure 19: Employment Share in Information Technology and Industry Outcomes, 2000-2015
Notes.–Sources: O*NET and Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). The figures plot the employment share in technology and
information services (IT) jobs with various industry outcomes between 2000-2015 at the three-digit industry level: growth in value
added, logged value added, logged earnings, and the share of intermediates in gross output.



64

To be even more concrete, Table 8 tabulates the growth in value added among the top four
and bottom four industries ranked in terms of average growth in value added between 1960 and
2014. Interestingly, the top four sectors are finance and information systems, whereas the bottom
four sectors are a combination of manufacturing and retail.

Sector Growth Rate Rank
Funds, trusts, other finance 0.140 1

Securities, contracts, investments 0.120 2
Computer systems designs 0.114 3

Data processing, internet publishing 0.102 4
Food and beverage stores 0.031 -4

Motor vehicle dealers and parts 0.027 -3
Textile mills 0.023 -2

Apparel and leather manufacturing 0.007 -1

Table 8: Cross-sectional Growth Rates, 1970-2016
Notes.–Sources: Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). The table tabulates the growth in value added for the top and bottom four
sectors ranked in terms of overall value added growth per year between 1960 and 2014.

A.2.2 Supplement to Earnings and Employment Premia

We begin by showing further robustness of the earnings and employment premia to alternative
refinements of the definition, namely the hourly wage and total hours (across all workers) premia.
Panel A in Figure 20 shows a similar result as the main text that the hourly wage premium grew
nearly identically in both manufacturing and services sectors from 1980-2013. The premium is also
quite quantitatively close to the earnings premium, which suggests that hours differences play only
a small role. Panel B tells a similar story. The observed total hours worked premium is similar as
the employment premium in the main results, which suggests that the intensive margin differences
in hours worked per worker in IT and non-IT jobs are fairly similar. There is a marginally larger
quantitative narrowing of the IT total hours premium, relative to the employment premium, which
follows from the fact that IT workers spend roughly 131 more hours worked per year (relative to
their counterparts).50

50The difference is larger in the manufacturing sector with 143 hours worked more among IT workers versus
only 125 hours worked more in the services sector. The estimate is conditional on family size, race, gender, marital
status, and schooling.



65

0 .2 .4 .6
hourly wage premia

2013

2005

2000

1990

1980

Panel A: Hourly Wage

manufacturing services

-.6 -.4 -.2 0
total hours premia

2013

2005

2000

1990

1980

Panel B: Total Hours

manufacturing services

Figure 20: Hourly Wage and Total Hours Premia to Information Technology, 1970-2015
Notes.–Sources: Census Bureau and O*NET. The figure plots the hourly wage and total hours (annual hours × number employees) in
high technology and information services jobs between 1970 and 2015. Earnings is deflated using the 2010 personal consumption
expenditures index.

We now turn to producing similar patterns on employment and earnings premia when using the
annual CPS. The primary downside is that the estimates are more noisy due to sampling variability
in the workers who are surveyed at the three-digit occupation level. Nonetheless, Figures 21 and
22 plot these premia. The crucial observation in Figure 21 is that, while the employment share
in manufacturing is declining (thinned dotted blue line), the employment share of IT jobs in the
manufacturing sector is rapidly rising (thick solid blue line). The rise of IT jobs accounts for



66

nearly all of the growth in the services sector.

0
.2

.4
.6

.8
%

 e
m

pl
oy

m
en

t s
ha

re
, s

ec
to

r t
ot

al

0
.1

.2
.3

.4
%

 e
m

pl
oy

m
en

t s
ha

re
, I

T 
sp

ec
ifi

c

1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 2020
year

IT, manufacturing IT, services
total, manufacturing total, services

Figure 21: Employment Shares in Technology and Information Services—Sectoral and Aggregate,
CPS Robustness
Notes.–Sources: Current Population Survey (CPS) ASEC. The figure plots several employment shares. The left y-axis plots the
employment share of manufacturing and services information technology workers (“IT v. non-IT”) relative to their sectoral total. The
right y-axis plots the employment share of manufacturing and services overall (“total”). As such, the level of the right y-axis will be
larger than the level of the left y-axis because it includes non-IT workers as part of the share. The purpose of providing both sets of
trends is to illustrate the IT share in manufacturing and services in light of the overall trends in these two sectors.



67

.4
.5

.6
.7

.8
lo

gg
ed

 e
ar

ni
ng

s 
pr

em
iu

m

1970 1985 2000 2015
year

manufacturing services

Figure 22: Earnings in Technology and Information Services, CPS Robustness
Notes.–Sources: Current Population Survey (CPS) ASEC. The figure plots earnings premia in manufacturing and services sectors
where the technology and information services (IT) intensity is based on being above the median score.

Figure 23 also examines heterogeneity in the earnings premia using two different classification
strategies: K-medians and K-means with K = 2. K-medians produces an almost identical result
as the regular medians-based approach, which is not surprising since our classification is based
on the single IT score. Using K-means tends to classify more occupations as IT-intensive, which
is why the earnings premia is marginally smaller—but clearly not by much by any stretch of the
imagination.



68

.5
.5

5
.6

.6
5

.7
.7

5
lo

gg
ed

 e
ar

ni
ng

s 
pr

em
ia

1970 1985 2000 2015
year

k-median k-mean
correlation b/w k-median and k-mean = 0.99

manufacturing

.4
5

.5
.5

5
.6

.6
5

.7
lo

gg
ed

 e
ar

ni
ng

s 
pr

em
ia

1970 1985 2000 2015
year

k-median k-mean
correlation b/w k-median and k-mean = 1.00

services

Figure 23: Comparing CPS Earnings Premia with K-medians and K-means
Notes.–Sources: Current Population Survey (CPS) ASEC. The figure plots earnings premia in manufacturing and services sectors
where the technology and information services (IT) intensity is based on two approaches: using K-medians and K-means estimators
for K = 2.

While the two series produce qualitatively similar series (e.g., the correlation between the
earnings and employment premia in the two are 0.88 and 0.86, respectively), there are at least two
reasons the OES data generates quantitatively different series. The first is that, since the CPS does
not aim to be representative of every occupation at a detailed five-digit level, it may overstate
one type of worker over another. These concerns are potentially amplified by the presence of
occupational misclassification, which has been documented by Kambourov and Manovskii (2013).
The second is that the CPS data only contains a five-digit occupation classification, whereas the
OES data contains a six-digit classification. To the extent there is some detailed within-occupation
reallocation, differences can emerge.



69

−
.4

−
.3

5
−

.3
−

.2
5

−
.2

−
.1

5
lo

gg
ed

 e
m

pl
oy

m
en

t p
re

m
iu

m

.5
.5

2
.5

4
.5

6
.5

8
.6

lo
gg

ed
 h

ou
rly

 w
ag

e 
pr

em
iu

m

1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
year

hourly wage premium employment premium

correlation = 0.86

OES, 1999−2015

Figure 24: Earnings and Employment in Information Technology Jobs, National
Notes.–Sources: Occupational Employment Statistics (Bureau of Labor Statistics). The figure plots the logged earnings premium
between information technology and non-IT workers (deflated using the 2010 personal consumption expenditures index) and the
logged employment premium. The employment premium is computed by summing across all IT and non-IT workers at a six-digit
occupation level.

Given the large rise in both the earnings and employment IT premia, we also examine how it
interacts with other documented premia in the labor market, in particular the returns to tenure
(we later examine the interaction with the returns to education). Using the CPS supplement on
job tenure between 1996 and 2014, we are able to non-parametrically characterize the IT premium
across the tenure distribution. To do this, we regress logged hourly wages on a vector of control-
ling covariates (age, number of children, race, gender, marital status, education), subsequently
averaging across the residualized earnings measures for each tenure bin. We include these con-
trols to mitigate the potential effects of the composition of the labor force throughout the tenure
distribution. We separately plot these returns for the 1996-2002 and 2010-2014 time periods to
understand the extent to which these returns might have shifted over time.

Figure 25 documents these results. First, and not surprisingly, the IT premium has grown over
the past decade and it has shifted the earnings premium up across the entire tenure distribution.
For example, between 1996-2002, IT workers with zero years of tenure would earn 30% more than
their non-IT counterparts, whereas between 2010-2014 they would earn 37% more. Looking at
the top of the tenure distribution, however, IT workers with 16-20 years of tenure earned roughly
24% more than their counterparts between 1996-2002, but between 2010-2014 the premium grew
by only one to two percentage points.

Second, and more importantly, the IT premium is declining in tenure. While it is possible that
technology companies—which employ a large share of IT workers—simply tend to have lower av-
erage tenure due to something embedded within their underlying production function, we provide



70

evidence that the declining premium is a natural result of a career ladder where skilled workers
begin in an IT-intensive job and then progress to a managerial job. Such examples are common-
place in many technology hubs, like Silicon Valley or San Francisco, where a skilled worker may
begin as a data scientist or consulting out of undergraduate and then transition towards a senior
managerial role after roughly a decade. The main reason for this is that, as individuals progress
in the career ladder, managerial skills become increasingly important and outpace the importance
of IT skills. In particular, while it is true that managers will leverage IT to broaden their span of
control, their comparative advantage in management begins to outweigh their absolute advantage.

.1
5

.2
.2

5
.3

.3
5

.4
lo

gg
ed

 IT
 e

ar
ni

ng
s 

pr
em

iu
m

0 
ye

ar
s

1 
ye

ar

2 
ye

ar
s

3 
ye

ar
s

4 
ye

ar
s

5 
ye

ar
s

6−
7 

ye
ar

s

8−
9 

ye
ar

s

10
−1

1 
ye

ar
s

12
−1

5 
ye

ar
s

16
−2

0 
ye

ar
s

21
+ 

ye
ar

s

years of tenure

1996−2002 2010−2014

Figure 25: Hourly Wage Premium, by Employee Tenure
Notes.–Sources: Current Population Survey Job Tenure Supplement. The figure plots the residualized logged earnings premium
between IT and non-IT-intensive jobs (identified using the O*NET measurements of tasks) across the distribution of tenure using the
CPS tenure supplement covering 1996, 1998, 2000, 2002, 2004, 2006, 2008, 2010, 2012, and 2014. Logged earnings are residualized by
regressing them against a vector of controls, including age, education, race, gender, marital status, and number of children, taking the
residual as the residualized logged earnings measure. Observations are weighted by the job tenure survey sample weights.

A.2.3 Supplemental Evidence on the Decline for C/NR Skills and College

The main text presents results about the earnings premium between IT and non-IT jobs restricted
to the set of college degree workers, and separately for C/NR skilled jobs. In both cases, the growth
rate from 2000 and 2015 is greater within-group than it is across groups—that is, restricted to
the set of college degree workers, the growth in the IT premium is greater than the growth in
the college premium across all in the labor force. We now present complementary plots that
characterize the employment premia between these jobs.

Beginning with Panel A in Figure 26, it is remarkable how much of the employment share
of college workers is accounted for by high IT workers. However, there is important longitudinal



71

variation. In the 1970s, these IT jobs accounted for almost all of the share of college degree
workers; roughly 15% had a college degree and 12% were in IT jobs. However, by 2015, nearly
37% of the labor force has a college degree and 27% are in IT jobs. The gap between the college
share and the “college + IT” share reflects the surge in growth of universities and expanded
access to a four-year college degree. Turning towards Panel B in Figure 26, we see that there is
not a substantial difference between the IT + C/NR and C/NR shares—that is, an even smaller
difference in comparison with the college share. For example, in 1970, roughly 27% of jobs were
classified as high C/NR and nearly 26% of those jobs were also classified as high IT. By 2015, the
share of high C/NR jobs grew to 45% and the share of “IT + C/NR” jobs grew to nearly 40%.



72

0 .1 .2 .3 .4
earnings premia

2013-2015

2005-2007

2000s

1990s

1980s

1970s

panel A: examining the college share

college share (among IT) college share (overall)

0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5
earnings premia

2013-2015

2005-2007

2000s

1990s

1980s

1970s

panel B: examining the C/NR share

C/NR share (among IT) C/NR share (overall)

Figure 26: Examining Heterogeneity in the Demand for Skills in High and Low IT Jobs (Em-
ployment Shares)
Notes.–Sources: Census Bureau and O*NET. Panel A plots the employment share of college and high IT workers relative to the total
labor force, together with the overall college share. Panel B plots the employment share of high cognitive and non-routine and high IT
occupations relative to the total labor force, together with the overall share of high C/NR jobs.

We examine the evolution of employment shares across the four permutations of IT/non-IT and
college/non-college jobs in Figure 27. Importantly, the share of IT and college degree workers has
grown from approximately 20% of the labor force to nearly 32%, and it dwarfs the marginal rise in
non-IT and college degree workers from 2% to roughly 5% over the past 40 years. Symmetrically,
the share of IT and non-college degree workers declined from 32% to 22%, which also dwarfs the



73

decline in non-IT and non-college degree workers from 45% to 42%.

0
.1

.2
.3

.4
.5

pe
rc

en
t o

f t
he

 la
bo

r 
fo

rc
e

1980 1990 2000 2010
year

IT + college IT + non−college
non−IT + college non−IT + non−college

Figure 27: Employment Shares in Information Technology Jobs, by College Attainment
Notes.–Sources: Census Bureau, 1980, 1990, 2000, 2005-2015. The figure plots the share of full-time workers across the permutations
of IT versus non-IT-intensive jobs and college and non-college degree workers.

A.3 Supplement to Quantitative Model

A.3.1 Generalizing the Task Prices: Industry and Task Groups

In order to extend the model to allow workers to also choose between industries, we begin with
the equation 34 of Adao (2016), which enables us to recover the marginal product growth of two
types of workers (IT and non-IT in our application):

∆Yg,r,t(π) = ∆ωITg,r,tlITg,r,t0(π) + ∆ω
NIT
g,r,t l

NIT
g,r,t0(π) + ∆νg,r,t(π) (13)

Now, notice that this equation can be reinterpreted to accommodate more than two types of
workers. The intuition is the following: the marginal product growth of each kind of job can
be recovered by estimating the equation above considering each job against a combination of the
other jobs. In the four types of workers case, we can write the following four equations:

∆Yg,r,t(π) = ∆ωIT,mang,r,t lIT,mang,r,t0 (π) + ∆ω
IT,man
g,r,t (1− lIT,mang,r,t0 (π)) + ∆νg,r,t(π) (14)



74

∆Yg,r,t(π) = ∆ωIT,servg,r,t lIT,servg,r,t0 (π) + ∆ω
IT,serv
g,r,t (1− lIT,servg,r,t0 (π)) + ∆νg,r,t(π) (15)

∆Yg,r,t(π) = ∆ωnon−IT,mang,r,t lnon−IT,mang,r,t0 (π) + ∆ω
non−IT,man
g,r,t (1− lnon−IT,mang,r,t0 (π)) + ∆νg,r,t(π) (16)

∆Yg,r,t(π) = ∆ωnon−IT,servg,r,t lnon−IT,servg,r,t0 (π) + ∆ω
non−IT,serv
g,r,t (1− lnon−IT,servg,r,t0 (π)) + ∆νg,r,t(π) (17)

where ωIT,mang,r,t , for instance, is a weighted average of the marginal product growth of the three
sectors that are not IT manufacturing. Rearranging the four equations above we get the following
equations that enable us to estimate the marginal product growth of the four types of jobs that
the workers are now allowed to choose:

∆Yg,r,t(π) = ∆ωIT,mang,r,t + (∆ωIT,mang,r,t −∆ωIT,mang,r,t )lIT,mang,r,t0 (π) + ∆νg,r,t(π) (18)

∆Yg,r,t(π) = ∆ωIT,servg,r,t + (∆ωIT,servg,r,t −∆ωIT,servg,r,t )lIT,servg,r,t0 (π) + ∆νg,r,t(π) (19)

∆Yg,r,t(π) = ∆ωnon−IT,mang,r,t + (∆ωnon−IT,mang,r,t −∆ωnon−IT,mang,r,t )lnon−IT,mang,r,t0 (π) + ∆νg,r,t(π) (20)

∆Yg,r,t(π) = ∆ωnon−IT,servg,r,t + (∆ωnon−IT,servg,r,t −∆ωnon−IT,servg,r,t )lnon−IT,servg,r,t0 (π) + ∆νg,r,t(π) (21)

A.4 Supplement to Revisiting the Solow Paradox

We partition industries into high and low IT based on their median IT intensity collapsed to a
three-digit industry level. We subsequently use the BEA data to generate a measure of real value
added deflating using price indices normalized to 2009 as the base year, which we use to compare
the heterogeneous productivity growth over time in different sectors and in high versus low IT
industries. Figure 28 documents these results. We see a stark difference in productivity between
not only the services and manufacturing sectors, but also, and more heavily, the high versus
low IT sectors. In other words, our alternative measurement strategy suggests that productivity
growth in industries with high concentrations of IT jobs is higher than productivity growth in
their counterpart industries.



75

5.
5

6
6.

5
7

7.
5

ln
(re

al
 v

al
ue

 a
dd

ed
)

1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 2020
year

high IT, manufacturing high IT, services
low IT, manufacturing low IT, services

Figure 28: Real Value Added in Services and Manufacturing with High / Low IT
Notes.–Sources: Current Population Survey and Bureau of Economic Analysis, 1970-2016. The figure plots the smoothed real value
added (deflating using 2009 price indices) in high versus low IT in manufacturing and services sectors. We use the CPS to produce IT
employment shares, which we use to classify an industry as high versus low IT based on whether its standardized z-score is above the
median or not.


