


































Please cite this paper as:

OECD (2017), “Making trade work for all”, OECD Trade Policy
Papers, No. 202, OECD Publishing, Paris.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/6e27effd-en

OECD Trade Policy Papers No. 202

Making trade work for all

OECD

JEL Classification: F13, F16, F18, F6

http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/6e27effd-en


 

OECD TRADE AND AGRICULTURE DIRECTORATE 

This paper is published under the responsibility of the Secretary-General of the OECD. The opinions 

expressed and the arguments employed herein do not necessarily reflect the official views of OECD 

countries. 

The publication of this paper has been authorised by Ken Ash, Director of the Trade and Agriculture 

Directorate 

Comments are welcome and should be sent to tad.contact@oecd.org. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

© OECD (2017) 

You can copy, download or print OECD content for your own use, and you can include excerpts from OECD 
publications, databases and multimedia products in your own documents, presentations, blogs, websites and teaching 
materials, provided that suitable acknowledgment of OECD as source and copyright owner is given. All requests for 
commercial use and translation rights should be submitted to rights@oecd.org.  

file://///main.oecd.org/sdataTAD/Applic/PUBLICATIONS/Working%20and%20Policy%20Papers/tad.contact@oecd.org


 

OECD TRADE POLICY PAPERS N°202 © OECD 2017 

MAKING TRADE WORK FOR ALL 

Against the background of rising anti-globalisation sentiment, this report argues that, while there are good 

reasons for some people to be angry, trade is not the root of many problems, nor can it solve them on its own. 

What is needed is an integrated approach to make the whole system work better for more people. This means 

three things. First, creating the environments where benefits from trade can materialise through domestic 

policies that encourage opportunity, innovation and competition by cutting unnecessary trade costs and 

investing in people and digital and physical infrastructure. Second, doing more to bring everyone along, 

including in lagging regions where trade shocks can be concentrated. Third, making the international system 

work better, harnessing the full range of international economic co-operation tools to level the international 

playing field, addressing the gaps in the rules and doing more to ensure that everyone, from companies to 

countries, plays by the rules.  

Key words Globalisation, labour, rules, cooperation 

JEL codes F6, F13, F16, F18 

Acknowledgements 

The note was prepared by Julia Nielson of the Trade and Agriculture Directorate (TAD) at the OECD. The 

author is grateful to Ken Ash and Carmel Cahill for helpful discussions. The author also gratefully 

acknowledges helpful inputs and comments from TAD colleagues: Przemek Kowalski, Javier Gonzalez-

Lopez, Sébastien Miroudot, Jared Greenville, Jehan Sauvage, Sylvia Sorescu, Daniel Rabaioli and 

Sebastian Vallejo.  

While responsibility for this Note lies with the Trade and Agriculture Directorate, the author gratefully 

acknowledges contributions from and helpful discussions with colleagues from a range of other Directorates 

across the OECD, in particular: Stefano Scarpetta, Mark Keese, Paul Swaim and Angelica Salvi del Pero from 

Employment, Labour and Social Affairs; Catherine Mann, Sebastian Barnes, Dorothée Rouzet and David 

Haugh, Economics Directorate; Joaquim Oliveira Martins, Miriam Koreen and Karin Maguire in the Centre 

for Entrepreneurship; Mathilde Mesnard, Ana Novik and Hans Christiansen from the Directorate for Fiscal 

Affairs; Carol Gurthrie and Julian Knott from Public Affairs; Sarah Fyson, Piotr Stryszowski, Florence 

Mouradian and Carissa Munro from Governance; Andy Wyckoff and Dirk Pilat from Science, Technology 

and Industry; David Bradbury from the Centre for Tax Policy; and Caitlyn Guthrie from the Education 

Directorate. 

  



MAKING TRADE WORK FOR ALL – 3 

OECD TRADE POLICY PAPERS N°202 © OECD 2017 

 

Table of contents 

  

Anger at the system has its roots in some genuine problems.......................................................................... 4 

But trade has improved lives and created new opportunities around the world ............................................. 6 

Cutting off trade is not the answer: Protectionism hurts those it is supposed to protect ................................ 7 

So what can be done to address the legitimate concerns of people that are losing out from a 

global economic system that is not yet free, fair and open? ........................................................................... 9 

I. Create the environments where the benefits from trade can materialise through 

domestic policies that encourage opportunity, innovation and competition ...................................... 9 

II.  Do more to bring everyone along ..................................................................................................... 11 

III. Make the international system work better, using the full range of international 

economic co-operation tools ............................................................................................................ 13 

Making trade work for all ............................................................................................................................. 17 

Notes ............................................................................................................................................................. 18 

References .................................................................................................................................................... 21 

Annex 1. Figures ........................................................................................................................................... 24 

 

Boxes 

Box 1. Labour markets, technology and trade ............................................................................................. 6 

Box 2. TiVA and what it tells us about trade ............................................................................................... 9 

Box 3. Structural reforms and investments that boost growth and equity ................................................. 11 

Box 4. Trade adjustment programs ............................................................................................................ 12 

Box 5. Responsible Business Conduct ...................................................................................................... 15 

 

 



4 – MAKING TRADE WORK FOR ALL 

 

OECD TRADE POLICY PAPERS N°202 © OECD 2017 

 

MAKING TRADE WORK FOR ALL 

Trade is coming under increasing fire. While in developing economies, generally, trade is regarded positively 

as a source of growth, development and jobs, in some advanced economies, even where people support trade 

in principle, they have more mixed views about particular trade agreements and trading relationships.
.1 

But trade is only one element of a broader reaction to both globalisation – encompassing not only trade but 

also, for example, finance, technology and migration – and domestic economic and political systems in the 

wake of the crisis. Many people, especially in some advanced economies, are expressing anger and frustration 

with an entire system that they no longer believe is delivering a better life for them and their families. They 

believe that the current system is not working for them; they feel that it is unfair, and there is increasing 

evidence that many of them may be right. 

Anger at the system has its roots in some genuine problems 

Consider these facts: 

 Since the economic crisis in 2008, lower growth in the global economy means not only fewer 
resources to meet current economic, social, environmental and security needs, it is also threatening 

promises made to today's workers for retirement benefits and pensions.  

 While some are doing very well, many are being left behind. There is a rising productivity gap 
between the best firms and the rest (Figure 1), which also means a gap in wages and opportunity for 

their workers.  

 Within-country income inequality is rising in many economies. Across the OECD area, the average 
income of the richest 10% of the population is now more than nine times that of the poorest 10%, up 

from seven times 25 years ago. This is driven in part by a surge in incomes at the top end, and 

especially among the top 1%, but in recent decades as much as 40% of the population at the lower 

end of the distribution has benefitted little from economic growth in many countries. Wealth is also 

concentrated: on average, in 2012, the top 1% wealthiest households in OECD countries for which 

data are available owned about 18% of total household wealth, more than the 13% owned by the 

bottom 60% of the distribution (OECD, 2015). 

 Many tax and benefit systems across the OECD area have become less redistributive, mainly due to 
working-age benefits not keeping pace with real wages, and taxes becoming less progressive 

(OECD, 2015). Expansions in the amount of tax revenue have been financed predominantly through 

taxes on labour and higher rates of VAT, affecting relatively more the middle class and low-income 

households respectively. 

 Inequality of opportunity is also increasing. Low income households are often unable to adequately 
invest in education for their children, which can have strong, detrimental effects and limit social 

mobility. In many OECD countries, socio-economic background matters for skills acquisition: a one 

level increase in parents’ education is associated with an average of an additional 20-30 score points 

in literacy proficiency in the OECD Survey of Adult Skills (OECD, 2013) (Figure 2).  



MAKING TRADE WORK FOR ALL – 5 

 

OECD TRADE POLICY PAPERS N°202 © OECD 2017 

The picture is even more worrying once we go beyond aggregates and averages.  

 Whole regions within countries are getting left behind. In some countries, the top 20% of regions 
have productivity levels three times that of the bottom 20%.

2
 One in four persons in OECD 

countries lives in a region that is increasingly falling behind the high-productivity regions in their 

country; these lagging regions would have to quadruple their growth rates to catch up by 2050 

(OECD, 2016). This growing productivity divide has far-reaching implications as productivity 

influences wages, jobs and health. 

 There is some evidence that rural areas tend to produce more tradable goods, which can mean 
that globalisation shocks may be felt more directly and scope for adjustment may be more 

limited (OECD, 2016).  

 In lagging regions, many workers have not been able to shift from declining into growing 
sectors and long-term unemployment and under-employment have increased. 

 Lagging regions can also struggle to attract new opportunities in the knowledge economy. In 
Japan, the concentration of patents in the top performing regions increased from 41.2% in the 

period 1994-1996 to 55.8% in the period 2011-2013. Similar increases in concentration also 

arose in the United Kingdom, France, Italy and Turkey (OECD, 2016a). In the United States the 

share of venture capital in the top 20% of regions increased from 51% in 1995 to 76% in 2014 

(PWC, 2015), while in the United Kingdom, equity investment in smaller businesses at the 

venture stage is heavily concentrated in the South-East and especially London, with investments 

increasing much more in these regions than others over the 2011-2015 period (British Business 

Bank, 2016). 

 Not all businesses are sharing the benefits of globally integrated markets. Small and medium-sized 
enterprises (SMEs) tend to be under-represented in international trade (OECD, 2016b). While a few 

“born global” firms and highly innovative SMEs are fully integrated into global markets, and a 

sizeable share of SMEs participates in global value chains (GVCs) as suppliers of exporters (OECD 

and World Bank, 2015), for many SMEs export relationships can be short-lived – only one or two 

years in many countries (Wagner, 2015). Smaller and less experienced exporters tend to be more 

vulnerable to drops in demand, such as after a global crisis (World Bank, 2010; Beverelli et al., 

2011). 

More broadly, there are concerns around the world that competition in the global economy is distorted by 

market barriers and government actions. From local content requirements to subsidies, to behind-the-border 

regulatory measures seen as favouring domestic companies and products, countries are concerned that others 

are not playing fair. One indication of countries' concern is the use of trade remedies (actions taken in 

response to perceived unfair competition by others). Between July 2013 and June 2016, World Trade 

Organisation (WTO) Members took 507 anti-dumping actions, 43 countervailing measures and introduced 36 

safeguards (with an increase in the latter of 50% between the period July 2014-June 2015 and July 2015-June 

2016, driven mainly by concerns in the steel sector).
3
  

Against this background, digitalisation is also bringing profound transformation, with new opportunities and 

challenges. While information and communications technology (ICT) is contributing to increased productivity 

and ultimately higher employment from new occupations and industries that compensate for initial job 

displacement, concerns remain as the breadth of the transformation comes into view. On average across 

countries, estimates are that 9% of jobs are at high risk of being automated, while for another 25% more jobs, 

50% to 70% of the tasks involved are at risk of automation (Arntz et al., 2016). While some workers will have 

the skills to adapt, and productivity gains and technology will see new jobs created, it is clear that workers 

will be displaced.  

Technology and trade are closely connected. Trade helps disseminate technology, trade is often about 

exchanging products produced with different technologies, and trade competition can spur technological 



6 – MAKING TRADE WORK FOR ALL 

 

OECD TRADE POLICY PAPERS N°202 © OECD 2017 

innovation. Equally, technology has helped transform modern trade and enable GVCs by greatly reducing 

communication, co-ordination and transport costs. The effects of trade and technology are mutually 

reinforcing, so policies need to address both (Box 1).  

Trade is itself a powerful driver of structural change, helping to reallocate resources to the sectors and areas 

where they can be most efficient. This is one of the key gains from trade, but also one of its costs. Not all of 

the gains from trade are immediate and not every worker benefits. Losses can be sharp and concentrated on 

individuals, often those with the least capacity to adjust on their own. Some import-competing industries in 

advanced countries have seen significant job losses. So as well as ensuring people are able to take advantage 

of opportunities from trade and technology, helping those facing hard adjustment is critical.  

Box 1. Labour markets, technology and trade 

The question of the relative contribution of technology and trade to labour market disruptions has been long studied (see, for 
example, OECD, 2012; Helpman, 2016). Most studies have concluded that the majority of the impact comes from technology, 
with trade bringing some additional change; however, the precise weights given to trade and technology have varied, including 
because of differences in how they are measured.  

A range of early work focused on the skilled, or college, wage premium in the United States, attributing around 20% of the impact 
to trade as opposed to skill-biased technological change (Borjas et al., 1997), or around 25% to offshoring versus around 30% for 
technology (Feenstra and Hanson, 1999; Feenstra and Hanson, 2003). More recently, Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017) have 
highlighted the role of industrial robots in reducing employment and wages in the United States between 1990 and 2007; an extra 

robot per 1 000 workers is estimated to reduce the employment to population ratio by 0.18-0.34 percentage points and wages by 
0.25-0.5% and this effect is distinct from the impacts of imports, the decline of routine jobs, offshoring, other types of information 
technology (IT) capital, or the total capital stock. 

The IMF (2017) has also found that that technology and global value chains (GVCs) have had a clear negative impact on the 
labour share of income, but that the impact of technology (measured with an index of a relative price of investment goods) was 
about twice as large as that of GVCs (around 33% of the actual decline, as opposed to 16% attributable to GVCs).  

Particular attention has also been paid to the role of trade in jobs losses in the manufacturing sector. However, OECD (2017) 
found a significant impact of technology (measured as expenditure on ICT capital services per hour worked and intensity of 
research and development) but did not find any significant impact of GVCs on job polarisation and de-industrialisation, although it 
found some contribution of imports from the People’s Republic of China (hereafter “China”) to de-industrialisation. Other OECD 
analysis (OECD, 2017a) also finds that rapid productivity gains in manufacturing and shifts in consumer preferences appear to 
explain much of the decline in manufacturing employment, with trade playing a relatively modest role. 

However, trade does have measurable and potentially important impacts, together with other drivers of change, on manufacturing 
employment in specific regions, given that many regions are dependent on a fairly narrow range of industrial activities. Recent 
work has pointed to the prolonged negative effects from changes in trading conditions experienced by some US workers in some 
regions (Author et al., 2016). While in many instances job and income losses from trade shocks were modest compared to the 
overall employment effects of US trade, significant numbers of workers were displaced in some geographic areas, negatively 
affecting other segments of local labour markets, slowing adjustment processes, and raising inequality (Autor et al., 2016). 
However, this work focused on the impact of imports and only from one trading partner (China), and did not factor in positive 
changes in employment related to export expansions to China or other trading partners. A similar pattern of regional employment 
losses related to trade can also be seen in some, but not all, other OECD economies (2017a), pointing to the role of additional 
factors in explaining the impact that trade can have. 

This remains an area for further work, in particular as both trade (including GVCs) and technology continue to evolve. However, it 
is clear that policy responses need to take account of the close interlinkages and mutual reinforcing nature of trade and 
technology in helping ensure that people are supported in adjusting to change.  

Yet many current labour-force adjustment policies, where they exist, do not always seem to be working as 

intended. Programmes can suffer from limited resources, poor targeting, conflicting measures and poor 

coordination. Workers displaced from manufacturing in some advanced economies can either remain 

unemployed, or move into jobs with much lower pay and far less security. In particular, there is evidence that 

some low-skilled men who have seen traditional manufacturing jobs disappear are struggling to move into 

new jobs, notably in services. And the disproportionate number of young people and women in low-paid jobs 

are seeing greater competition for those jobs, holding down pay levels and reducing opportunities for 

advancement. This is particularly true where other factors combine with trade shocks – such as in the current 

environment of low growth and sluggish demand, or in lagging regions with limited alternative prospects 



MAKING TRADE WORK FOR ALL – 7 

 

OECD TRADE POLICY PAPERS N°202 © OECD 2017 

where adjustment difficulties are compounded by limited mobility due to housing and credit markets.
4
But 

even the most effective labour adjustment policies do not create well-matched jobs for displaced workers; 

they can facilitate re-skilling and mobility but job creation requires policies to boost investment and growth, 

especially in regions where job losses are concentrated.  

But trade has improved lives and created new opportunities around the world  

People trade because it is in their interests: relatively open economies grow faster than relatively closed 

economies, and salaries and working conditions are generally better in companies that trade than those that do 

not (OECD, 2012). Global trade and gross domestic product (GDP) growth are positively correlated: times of 

low growth have been those when economic integration was slowing or had reversed (OECD, 2016d) 

(Figure 3). Rising trade ratios are also broadly correlated with overall increases in productivity over the long 

run (Newfarmer and Sztajerowska, 2012).
5
 Participation in GVCs is also associated with economic benefits 

such as productivity growth, less concentrated export baskets and growing sophistication of exports (Kowalski 

et al., 2015). Within countries, regions that are catching up in terms of productivity have a higher and growing 

share of their economies in tradable sectors than those falling behind. Evidence also suggests better diffusion 

of frontier technology from firms that are engaged in GVCs and that trade with frontier firms.
6
 SMEs in 

particular stand to gain from spill-overs of technology and managerial know-how, as well as opportunities to 

scale up and enhance productivity. The more a country trades, the more technology and ideas spread; workers 

get more done, and higher productivity leads to better wages. 

By boosting growth, trade has contributed to lifting hundreds of millions of people out of poverty: the share of 

the world's population living on less than PPP USD 1.90 per day fell from around 35% in 1990 to less than 

11% in 2013 (WBG, 2016). Evidence on the impact of trade on poverty in developing countries over 1993-

2008 shows that the change in the real income of the bottom 20% of the population is strongly correlated with 

the change in trade openness over the same period (IMF et al., 2017) (Figure 4). Inequality among countries 

has also fallen (Dabla-Norris et al., 2015).  

Developing and emerging economies are also playing a more important role in trade today than ever before 

(Figure 5). This has not only improved lives and created new opportunities in poor countries, but also created 

new markets and opportunities for advanced economies too. And more prosperity and opportunity around the 

world also helps promote greater stability and security for everyone.  

Trade has delivered unprecedented access to goods and services, with a revolution in the availability of goods 

for low income households.
7
 For example, ambitious liberalisation efforts mean that electronics now face 

some of the lowest trade barriers (Figure 6). Significant reductions in trade barriers as well as other factors
8
 

resulted in extraordinary falls in the price of electronic products: between 1980 and 2014 the price of a 

(roughly comparable) TV set has been cut by 73% and the price of a microwave by 93% – and the smart TV 

sets and microwaves we buy today are vastly better than those available in the 1980s.  

Lower prices from trade opening particularly benefit poor households (Figure 7).
9
 This is because poor 

households spend relatively more on products that are more traded (e.g. food or textiles) while the rich spend 

relatively more on those that are traded less (e.g. services). This can be particularly the case in those rich 

countries which are not specialised in these (food and garment) staple products that poor households consume.  

Cutting off trade is not the answer: Protectionism hurts those it is supposed to protect 

Tariffs are regressive taxes. In the case of food products, for example, agro-food products globally attract 

higher rates of protection than industrial goods (9.9% compared to 3.3%). Within this, it is often staple crops 

and basic foods that are most heavily taxed – tariffs on wheat, a basic input into bread, stand at 12.6%; rice at 

24%, beef & veal and poultry round 13.5% each; and dairy at 15%.
10

 In the European Union for example, in 

the period 2013-15 agricultural protection cost consumers on average EUR 19.8 billion per year.
11

 This 

particularly hurt poorer households who spend a greater share of their income on food. In the United States, 



8 – MAKING TRADE WORK FOR ALL 

 

OECD TRADE POLICY PAPERS N°202 © OECD 2017 

low- and middle-income households spend a higher proportion of their income and non-housing expenditure 

on tariffs, with the burden highest on the poorest 10% (Furman et al., 2017). Tariffs also tend to be higher on 

cheaper goods: in both the United States and the European Union, for example, tariffs on footwear made of 

plastic face higher tariffs than those made of leather.
12

  

Raising protection not only hurts low income households as consumers; in a world of GVCs where goods and 

services are produced by combining the efforts of many actors across different countries, protection also hurts 

producers. And this means that it hurts jobs. In GVCs, export competitiveness is linked to being able to access 

the cheapest and best quality inputs – including from imports. Tariffs raise prices for domestic producers, who 

become less competitive as exporters in global markets – and less able to sustain jobs at home. Imports don't 

just increase export competitiveness, they make jobs possible in domestic production as well: more than 50% 

of German imports are intermediate inputs, supporting local jobs; for the United States, the figure is more than 

40%.
13

 Not all inputs for domestic manufacturers can be built domestically if goods and services are going to 

remain affordable.  

In GVCs, imported inputs also themselves include inputs (or value) from a range of other countries – for 

example, over 40% of the value in China's manufacturing exports comes from other countries (Figure 8). 

Some of a country's imports will also include goods or services it has previously exported, for example: 

German imports of goods from Hungary contain over 12% German value-added content; Chinese imports of 

goods from Cambodia contain over 16% Chinese value-added content, and US imports of goods from Mexico 

consists of over 15% US value added content.
14

 

In a world of GVCs, it no longer makes sense simply to think of imports versus exports; imports are often an 

integral ingredient in the competitiveness of exports, and of domestic production, and can also contain your 

own previous exports. International trade has fundamentally changed: in GVCs, trade is not a game you win 

by having fewer imports, as the OECD and WTO TiVA database illustrates (Box 2).  

Countries that raise trade costs for partners harm their own growth, while everyone gains from trade 

facilitation reforms that make trade easier and cheaper (Figure 9). In OECD analysis of a hypothetical 

scenario in which Europe, the United States and China raised trade costs for all partners on all goods by 

10 percentage points, the estimated impacts were lower world GDP (by 1.4%) and global trade (by 6%), with 

the countries imposing the trade barriers lowering their own GDP the most (OECD 2016d).
15

  

The same is true for jobs. With domestic firms needing competitively priced imports, raising tariffs only risks 

destroying jobs by putting small and medium-sized businesses out of business and encouraging big business 

to send more jobs overseas. Not all countries are competitive in all tasks: richer countries, with more 

productive workers and higher wages are less competitive in labour-intensive activities. So when jobs are 

maintained behind tariff walls, these higher costs mean that the jobs that remain change, requiring higher skill 

levels, or are reduced by greater use of automation.
16

 

Even without trade, technology is still transforming how goods and services are produced and how jobs are 

organised. Employment in manufacturing has declined significantly in all advanced economies, even though 

output from manufacturing has actually increased due to major gains in productivity (Obsteld, 2016).
17

 Trade 

and technological change have also contributed to the widespread trend toward wage and job polarisation in 

advanced economies which has created additional opportunities for high-skilled workers while exposing 

middle-skilled workers to the risk of downward mobility (Box 1). On average for the OECD area, the 

employment share of low- and high-skilled occupations rose by 2.5 and 4.3 percentage points, respectively, 

between 1995 and 2015, while the employment share of middle-skilled occupations fell by 6.8 percentage 

points (OECD, 2017).  

In this situation, the solution is to support workers, not protect jobs. Jobs retained solely by protection are 

unlikely to be sustainable; nor are the supported activities likely to be sufficiently competitive to be able to 

generate other jobs. And adjustment becomes harder when an industry has been too protected. Protecting 

specific jobs or firms is a costly way of helping relatively few people, with costs often increasing over time, 

and likely to result in lost jobs in other sectors. For example, in Australia, protection for the automotive sector 



MAKING TRADE WORK FOR ALL – 9 

 

OECD TRADE POLICY PAPERS N°202 © OECD 2017 

supported around 40 000 jobs, but at a cost of around AUD 30 billion over the period 1997-2012 or AUD 2 

billion per year. Moreover, this support was found to have forestalled, but not prevented, the significant 

structural adjustment facing the industry (Australian Productivity Commission, 2014).
18

 Likewise, additional 

US tariffs on Chinese tyres in 2009 are estimated to have cost at least USD 900 000 a year for each job saved 

and were associated with three times as many job losses in other sectors (Hufbauer and Lowry, 2012). An 

open economy, with higher growth, can fund an effective social safety net that provides better support for 

more people than buying individual jobs through trade protection. 

Box 2. TiVA and what it tells us about trade 

The goods and services we buy are composed of inputs from various countries around the world. However, the flows of 
goods and services within these global production chains are not always reflected in conventional trade statistics. The joint 
OECD–WTO Trade in Value-Added (TiVA) initiative addresses this issue by considering the value added by each country in the 
production of goods and services that are consumed worldwide. TiVA indicators are designed to better inform policy makers by 
providing new insights into the commercial relations between nations. The most recent version of the database (December 2016) 
covers 63 economies and 34 unique industrial sectors up to 2011, offering new insights into evolving globalisation and providing 
a basis for identifying policy implications.  

Analysis based on TiVA has underscored the need for countries to have an open, predictable and transparent trade and 
investment regime. In a world of global value chains (GVCs), tariffs, non-tariff barriers and other restrictive measures are 
amplified and affect not only foreign suppliers, but also the competitiveness of domestic producers. The data has also highlighted 
the growing “servicification” of economic activities: services represent around 25% of gross exports, but in value added terms, 
taking into account the service value added content embodied in products, the figure is close to 50%. Nearly half of all service 
exports are embodied in goods.  

The data also underscores the important role of imports of intermediate goods and services in export performance and the 
fact that imports often embody a country's own (returned) domestic value added. The TiVA database shows that on average, 
across sectors and countries, close to 30% of global exports are accounted for by imported value added, up from around 20% in 
the mid-1990s. In some manufacturing sectors which tend to be more integrated into GVCs, these share are even higher; for 
example, 40% of Germany’s exports of transport equipment are accounted for by foreign value added coming mostly from 
neighbouring European countries. The TiVA database also shows that bilateral trade balances can change significantly when 
measured in value added terms (although the overall trade balance is unaffected). For example, in 2011 the bilateral value added 
trade balance of the United States with China was lower in value by 35% than the bilateral gross trade balance. This because an 
important part of China’s export to the United States originates from third countries (Figure 8). 

 

So what can be done to address the legitimate concerns of people that are losing out from a global 

economic system that is not yet free, fair and open? 

The reality is that trade alone did not cause all of the problems that concern so many people today, and trade 

alone will not solve them either. Governments need to act across many fronts simultaneously, recognising that 

the impact of global trade on people depends both on the national policy settings of the countries in which 

they live and on the nature and degree of international economic cooperation. This implies working across 
silos and taking a much more integrated policy approach, both domestically and internationally, in order to 

make the whole system work better for more people. 

Specifically, action is required in three broad areas.  

I. Create the environments where the benefits from trade can materialise through domestic policies 

that encourage opportunity, innovation and competition 

To fulfil promises to today's workers, tomorrow's retirees and the next generation, we need new sources of 

inclusive growth. But the impact of openness on growth – and critically on inclusive growth – depends upon 

the conditions in the domestic economy that enable benefits to materialise and be fairly distributed and for 

people and firms to have the capacity to take advantage of new opportunities. While the precise menu of 



10 – MAKING TRADE WORK FOR ALL 

 

OECD TRADE POLICY PAPERS N°202 © OECD 2017 

structural and fiscal reforms depends on each country's circumstances, the following broad aims should be 

pursued.  

Reduce the unnecessary costs that policies can unintentionally impose on traders, and which make it 

particularly difficult for SMEs and young firms to participate in international trade and thereby help create 

jobs. Reform of slow or cumbersome border procedures can cut the costs of trading by 12 to 18%, depending 

on a country's level of development (Figure 10) (OECD 2015a).
19

 Where products cross borders multiple 

times as part of GVCs, trade costs from border inefficiencies add up. But so do tariffs (Figure 11). Lower 

tariffs and trade facilitation reforms mean that more firms, and smaller firms, can export into, or source high 

quality inputs from, global markets.  

Ensuring access to efficient, world-class and affordable services is essential for both firm competitiveness and 

individual wellbeing. Yet in many of the services that underpin economies, from telecoms to transport and 

professional services, competition is limited and the playing field is not level, especially for foreign investors, 

holding back potential economy-wide productivity gains and stronger growth.
20

 Restrictions on services trade 

impose costs on local firms that rely on efficient services to be competitive in export markets; this impact is 

estimated to be equivalent to a sales tax of between 3% and 38% on purchased services depending on the 

sector,
21

 particularly disadvantaging SMEs. Services are key for the performance of manufacturing, 

accounting for over 30% of the value of total manufacturing exports (up to 40% for motor vehicles and 

chemicals), and even for food and agriculture, where they account for 24% of the value added in exports 

(compared to 15% for industrials) (OECD, 2016e).  

Open and competitive services markets are not unregulated markets; governments retain the right to regulate 
and to ensure that all companies, domestic and foreign, meet environmental and labour standards. Regulation 

is also essential to ensure that services markets remain competitive – as is the case, for example, with access 

to essential infrastructure in network services, such as rail transport or telecommunications services. Open 

economies need transparent, efficient regulation that allows for competition, underpinned by the rule of law, 

providing confidence to investors, firms and citizens. This also creates a virtuous circle: more open and 

competitive markets can contribute to integrity; trade facilitation reforms, for example, reduce both incentives 

and opportunities for corruption.
22

 

Invest in the capacity, underpinned by sound regulatory frameworks, to connect people to jobs and markets 

and enable them to participate in new opportunities. Productivity-enhancing investments
23

 can not only 

increase long-term supply capacity, but can also boost demand in the short term. With the right regulatory and 

institutional frameworks, such public spending can be a good investment, increasing output by more than they 

increase debt, especially if they catalyse private investment.
24

 Domestic policies can be targeted at boosting 

both growth and inclusion, at dynamism and efficiency, as well as equity (OECD, 2016d, Box 3).  

Investment in physical infrastructure, from roads to ports, affects not just economic performance but also 

social goals, for example by helping people access health and education and by connecting lagging regions to 

higher productivity areas. This includes investment in digital infrastructures, including efficient, reliable and 

widely accessible broadband communication networks, data, software, hardware, as well as the services 

provided over the networks. Ensuring access for all at an affordable price requires sound framework and 

telecommunications policies, competition – including through open markets – and measures, such as national 

broadband strategies, to help reach disadvantaged groups, firms and rural or remote areas (OECD, 2016f).  

But it also means investment in people – from early childhood through to lifelong learning, investments in 

education are investments in both equity and growth.
25

 People do not just need technical skills; investments in 

education and training should aim to ensure that all workers are equipped with the cognitive, social and 

emotional skills needed to seize the opportunities that digitisation offers. 

  



MAKING TRADE WORK FOR ALL – 11 

 

OECD TRADE POLICY PAPERS N°202 © OECD 2017 

Box 3. Structural reforms and investments that boost growth and equity 

National policies can be better tuned towards ensuring more equal income distribution as well as ensuring faster and more 
efficient resource allocation and growth. The breakdown of growth into its main sources, i.e. labour utilisation and productivity, 
sheds light on the links between growth and inequality (Hermansen et al., 2016). Reforms that boost labour utilisation growth are 
likely to be the most directly effective in making globalisation more inclusive as higher aggregate employment disproportionately 
benefits households in the bottom half of the income distribution (Causa et al., 2016, Hermansen et al., 2016).  

Productivity-enhancing reforms, by contrast, will need to be combined with others to make sure the benefits are widely spread. 
Aggregate labour productivity gains benefit significantly more rich households and those in the upper-middle class than poor 
households and those in the lower-middle class (Causa et al., 2016, Hermansen et al., 2016). Reforms that boost growth via 
raising productivity, such as increasing competition and innovation, are often found to be associated with wider earning gaps 
(OECD, 2011), partly through their role in stimulating skilled-biased technology changes. Therefore such reforms must be 
combined with measures to facilitate workers’ up-skilling and to reduce skill mismatch. 

Some policies that promote labour-force participation and job creation, such as reducing minimum wages, can also widen wage 
dispersion. However, where they contribute to raising employment – not least among lower-skilled workers – such reforms may 
have a neutral effect on the dispersion of households’ disposable income. Moderate minimum wage reductions are not found to 
trigger a rise in disposable income inequality if they allow for encouraging employment creation among the low-skilled, and this 
effect may counteract potential increases in wage dispersion (Causa et al., 2016). By contrast, the trend decline in the rate of 
unionisation experienced by many OECD countries over the last three decades is found to have contributed to the rise in income 
inequality. 

A number of reforms unambiguously reduce wage dispersion and/or household income inequality. This is the case of better 
access to education, active labour market policies and growth-friendly tax and transfer systems (OECD, 2015). 

II.  Do more to bring everyone along  

Trade disrupts, that's one way it works. But we need to ensure that temporary setbacks do not turn into 

lifelong disadvantages.  

But existing policies have failed to meet this challenge; they have been overwhelmed by the speed and depth 

of the structural changes in the economy and the labour market brought about the confluence of globalisation, 

rapid technological change and population ageing, and struggled in the face of the broader trends of rising 

inequality. 

Adjustment policies focusing only on those displaced by trade are not enough (Box 4). Making the whole 

system work better for more people calls for an approach that puts improved well-being and stronger and 

more inclusive growth at the centre and empowers citizens, firms and communities to adjust to rapid changes 

and benefit from the opportunities created by technology, globalisation and trade. Again, the exact recipe will 

vary by country, but efforts – both more substantial investments and policies – need to target not only labour 

markets and social safety nets, but also equality of opportunity: 

 Investments that support both people and growth by ensuring access to good quality health and 
education for everyone, and strengthening opportunities for the most disadvantaged. 

 Effective activation frameworks to bring more people into the labour force and make work pay, 
while improving their employability and expanding their job opportunities.  

 Better anticipation and responses to changing skill needs, and foster better use of skills in the 
workplace. 

 Reforms to promote labour market inclusion for under-represented groups – notably women, youth, 
and older workers. 

 Strengthened effectiveness of redistribution systems; putting in place well-designed income-support 
policies and counter-cyclical social spending. 

 Linking entitlements to individuals rather than jobs so that they can support mobility and be 
portable from one job to the next. 



12 – MAKING TRADE WORK FOR ALL 

 

OECD TRADE POLICY PAPERS N°202 © OECD 2017 

Box 4. Trade adjustment programs 

When workers are displaced by trade they should receive adequate income and re-employment support. In general, the 
best way to provide such support is through general government programmes, such as unemployment insurance schemes and 
active labour market programmes. Nonetheless, programmes targeted at displaced workers can be a useful supplement for 
mass layoffs, with a surge in unemployed persons all chasing the same types of largely unavailable jobs, or where general active 
labour market programmes (ALMPs) are limited in scope and effectiveness. In some cases, longer training and re-education 
programmes that lead to technical or science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) related qualifications that match 
current skill demands offer promise.  

There is a much weaker case for adjustment assistance measures that are targeted at trade-displaced workers. There is 
an evident inequity in providing special assistance for the relatively small share of displaced workers whose job loss can be 
linked to international competition, when similar assistance is denied to other displaced workers facing similar adjustment 
difficulties. Cumbersome administrative procedures are also required to determine eligibility, leading to arbitrary decisions 
(e.g. whether workers displaced from a domestic supplier of a trade-impacted firm should qualify) and potentially long delays 
which greatly undercut the timeliness and effectiveness of the support. There are some economic arguments for targeted 
measures for trade-displaced workers in cases where income and re-employment or training support for the unemployed are 
under-resourced. This can lead to an improved management of trade-driven restructuring and, importantly, can strengthen 
political support for trade reform. However, these can come at the cost of both administrative duplication and inequities. The best 
solution is to offer effective re-employment services to all displaced workers (indeed, to all jobseekers). Where this is not 
politically or fiscally viable currently, measures which prove to be cost-effective should be extended to all displaced workers as 
soon as possible.  

 

Other policies also matter. As trade shocks can be concentrated in regions where there are few other 

employment opportunities, an important focus is increasing the resilience of and revitalising regional 

economies. Productivity catch-up for regions can require infrastructure and governance arrangements that 

increase connectivity to cities and make rural-urban systems work, and encouraging a strong presence of the 

tradable sector, through an open economy where regions can be competitive based on their local assets, 

territorially-differentiated products or services and smart specialisation (OECD, 2016). It means adapting 

economy-wide policies to local communities, and promoting local policies that reduce or remove the barriers 

limiting access to opportunities. Communities with higher concentrations of low-skilled people require 

locally-adapted skills policies, including to smooth the transition from manufacturing or resource-extraction 

sectors to knowledge-intensive services which can require substantial adjustments in the skills of the existing 

workforce.  

Digitalisation and globalisation are also challenging existing labour market institutions and models of social 

protection which increasingly need to adapt to a changing world of work. Many countries were already 

struggling to provide adequate social protection to non-standard workers before the growth of additional new 

forms of employment enabled by digital platforms (e.g. for ride-sharing). Against the background of 

globalisation, profound technological change from digitalisation and demographic shifts, a new social contract 

will need to facilitate adjustment while providing an adequate safety net, including more opportunities for 

people to re-skill throughout their working lives, and policies from entitlements, to housing and access to 

credit and social services that facilitate mobility and support people in change. And both the affordability of 

programs to assist adjustment, and efforts to address inequality will benefit from moves to broaden the tax 

base and to design tax policies with both growth and equity in mind (Figure 12).  

Finally, we may need to take another look at the toolkit, to assess whether we have what we need or whether 

there are new options that we need to consider. The OECD is looking at these issues to help governments be 

better prepared.  

But inclusiveness is not just about jobs or income; it's about empowerment and voice. There is much to do to 

make trade policy-making more inclusive, discussed further below.  



MAKING TRADE WORK FOR ALL – 13 

 

OECD TRADE POLICY PAPERS N°202 © OECD 2017 

III. Make the international system work better, using the full range of international economic 

cooperation tools 

Trade is also shaped by a wider set of issues in how countries interact with each other in the global economy - 

from financial regulation and tax cooperation, combatting bribery and corruption, to workers' rights and 

environmental protection.  

These issues are the subject of different kinds of agreements in the international economic cooperation toolkit, 

ranging from legally binding multilateral rules and voluntary guidelines and codes of conduct, to transparency 

and dialogue. Some are also increasingly included in trade agreements; in fact, arguably, we don't really have 

trade agreements any more, but rather broader economic cooperation arrangements that already include a 

wider range of economic issues and, increasingly, a range of other issues beyond those directly falling under 

trade, often referred to as “progressive” provisions (Figure 13). 

Countries agree these international “rules of the road” – be they in trade agreements or other instruments – 

because it's in their interests: for fair competition (including where approaches and standards differ) or 

because benefits are greater, or risks avoided, when everyone acts together. International economic 

cooperation levels the playing field: big and small countries both get a say. The alternative is international 

relations governed only by the exercise of raw power, or beggar-thy-neighbour policies risking escalating 

conflict. 

But the international system we have now is not delivering for everyone. The lack of an international level 

playing field is among the factors that affect the allocation of trade benefits, both within and among countries, 

sectors, workers and regions. To make the system more free, fair and open we need to fix the areas where we 

have gaps and unfinished business. And we need to do much more to ensure that everyone, from companies to 

countries, plays by the agreed rules.  

We need to address the gaps in the international rules of the road, and do more to ensure that everyone plays 
by the rules 

We can start with trade. The rules-based multilateral trading system embodied in the WTO has underpinned 

the growth in global trade, allowing more economies to benefit from equal access to global markets. 

Critically, WTO rules helped to prevent a slide into a 1930s-style trade war that would have greatly 

exacerbated the global economic crisis. The WTO brings together all trading economies, big and small, to 

resolve trade disputes in an orderly way and to agree rules aimed at making trade more free and more fair. 

Changes in the global economy and the slowdown in trade call for strengthening the WTO. As a starting 

point, the best way to support the rules-based multilateral trading system is for WTO Members to do what 

they said they’d do. We need to get more serious about implementing, monitoring and enforcing what we 

agree.  

And there's more to do. In the debate about the benefits of free trade, it's worth recalling that we don't actually 

have free trade. Measures such as tariffs, non-tariff measures, subsidies and local content requirements remain 

pervasive, costing consumers and taxpayers money, tilting the playing field and undermining the comparative 

advantage and specialisation on which many of the gains from trade and investment are based. We need to fix 

the rules where we have gaps and unfinished business.  

Agricultural products face higher trade barriers, such as tariffs and quotas, and are more likely to face non-

tariff measures, such as quarantine, public health, and other technical measures. For example, applied 

weighted average agro-food tariffs in 2014 were three times those for industrial goods, and the average ad 

valorem effect of non-tariff measures around twice that of industrial goods. Agricultural markets in many 

countries have greater levels of government intervention, such as through direct budgetary payments or 

regulated marketing channels and price controls. These policies often undermine their stated aims, harming 

low-income households by raising food prices and, in aggregate, failing to increase world production – and in 

fact possibly harming it. The OECD is helping to promote reform by measuring and analysing how countries 



14 – MAKING TRADE WORK FOR ALL 

 

OECD TRADE POLICY PAPERS N°202 © OECD 2017 

protect agriculture, and the impact of that protection on other countries and at home, especially for poor 

households. The OECD helps countries to design policies for productive, sustainable and innovative food 

systems so that they can achieve their food security and other goals without harming other countries or 

consumers.  

There's also more to do to understand the increasingly complex relationship between trade and investment 

in global value chains and the differences in national and international regulation of these activities. Firms 

rely extensively on an ecosystem of third-party suppliers, different partners and companies that are distinct 

from the network of affiliates resulting from Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) decisions. The OECD is 

undertaking new research to clarify the nature of firm-level engagement in complex FDI which can help to 

identify what matters most in the policy environment, and how multinational enterprises operate as networks 

within the production chains of GVCs, with implications for building both capabilities and competitiveness. 

Beyond trade, there are gaps in other areas as well that can impact the international level playing field; in 

some areas the challenge is to broaden and deepen adherence to agreed tools.  

Competition policy is another gap. The scope of the powers of national competition authorities does not 

match that of globalised business activity. International efforts to address cross-border anticompetitive 

conduct need to be strengthened through enhanced cooperation and information-sharing, and adherence to 

common principles. The OECD is promoting international cooperation and generating standards that address 

issues of fairness and help level the global playing field. While the digital economy is broadly beneficial for 
competition, it is also giving rise to emerging issues which underscore the need for enhanced cooperation 

among competition authorities.  

Maintaining a level playing field among state-owned and private businesses is also a challenge amid rapid 

internationalisation of state-owned enterprises (SOEs). In some countries, SOEs benefit from preferential 

domestic treatment, or from relatively cheap finance from commercial lenders perceiving an implicit 

government guarantee. While this may be well-justified within their national jurisdiction, based on the public 

services these SOEs are expected to perform, the internationalisation of their operations call for caution to 

maintain a healthy competitive environment (OECD, 2016g). Raising standards of transparency and 

governance remains important: the OECD Guidelines on Corporate Governance of State-Owned Enterprises 

set out ways that SOEs can operate according to similar corporate and commercial standards as private firms. 

Widening adherence to the Guidelines remains an important task.  

Export credits – credits or guarantees extended by governments in support of their exporters for international 

transactions – have also been the subject of negotiations to promote a level playing field and reduce the 

potential for trade distortion. The OECD export credit committees have developed several instruments that 

have set international norms for export credits. The Arrangement on Officially Supported Export Credits
 
sets 

the most generous terms for officially supported export credits and has been incorporated into the WTO 

Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures. The committees have also developed a framework 

agreement
26

 on project-related environmental and social due diligence issues, benchmarking against 

international (i.e. World Bank Group) standards, which is also becoming the international norm for other 

financial institutions in such projects.  

On tax, OECD-G20 work on Base Erosion and Profit Shifting (BEPS) and Automatic Exchange of Financial 

Account Information for Tax Purposes (AEOI) are supporting both global growth and equity by helping to 

ensure that companies and individuals operating in a global economy pay their fair share of tax to national 

authorities. Estimates suggest that between 4% and 10% of global corporate income tax revenues, 

i.e. USD 100-240 billion annually (OECD, 2015b) are lost as a result of base erosion and profit-shifting 

measures by companies. Continued and deeper international cooperation is essential for efforts to crack down 

on tax avoidance and evasion at the international level. Efforts pay off: already, strengthening transparency 

standards has yielded more than EUR 80 billion over the last seven years, thanks to the introduction of 

voluntary disclosure programs and similar initiatives.  



MAKING TRADE WORK FOR ALL – 15 

 

OECD TRADE POLICY PAPERS N°202 © OECD 2017 

Fighting corruption is central to making the global economy fair and cooperation among all countries is 

essential. One part of this is the Convention on Combating Bribery of Foreign Public Officials in International 

Business Transactions, ratified by 41 countries so far, which requires countries to criminalise bribery of 

foreign public officials in international business transactions and to subject themselves to rigorous 

implementation monitoring. OECD research shows that only investors from countries that became Parties to 

the Convention reduced their exposure to perceived corruption destinations but more work remains to be done 

to strengthen implementation of the Convention and to bring more countries on board. But action is also 

needed on integrity risks specific to trade, such as preventing corruption in customs administrations, where 

implementation of the WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement can play an important role,
27

 and also on tackling 

illicit trade, including in counterfeits (as much as USD 461 billion of international trade in 2013 was in 

counterfeit goods, equivalent to 2.5% of global imports, OECD-EUIPO (2016) (Figure 14).  

Labour standards and working conditions go to the heart of whether people believe the system is fair. 

Notwithstanding their fundamental importance and universal concerns about working conditions, there remain 

differences of view among countries on how these issues should be taken forward in the context of economic 

cooperation, including against the backdrop of differences in approach among countries (reflecting cultural or 

historical traditions) as well as differences in levels of development (including poverty and institutional 

capacity). Important international standards and monitoring mechanisms on labour standards and working 

conditions exist in the form of the International Labour Organisation's (ILO) core labour standards and Decent 

Work agenda.
28

 These play an important role in both ensuring decent conditions for people, and in addressing 

concerns that exploitative conditions that drive down costs could provide countries with a competitive 

advantage in global markets. In addition to compliance with international standards, and the adequacy of 

countries' domestic labour laws in this respect, concerns have also been raised about the extent to which 

countries are enforcing their laws. Raising labour standards and improving working conditions remains 

critical for people to feel that the global system is working for all. 

Lastly, concerns about the absence of a level playing field also relate to how companies behave, including 

whether they are respecting environmental and social standards, as well as integrity standards. Responsible 

business conduct (RBC, Box 5), is not just good for communities and for sustainable development, there is 

also a considerable body of evidence showing that it is good for business.
29

 

Box 5. Responsible Business Conduct 

One important element for making the international system work better concerns responsible business conduct (RBC), including 
in the supply chain. There is a growing recognition that to achieve sustainable and inclusive growth, there is a need for 
responsible business practices throughout the entire supply chain, and for not only more, but better, investment. Yet the 
complexity of the value chain means that it has sometimes proven difficult to “see and know” what is happening down the entire 
length of the supply chain. This complexity and the gaps in governance can directly undermine the level playing field for 
businesses and undermine the benefits of globalisation. These gaps need to be filled.  

Governments, businesses, trade unions, civil society, and international organisations all have important roles in promoting and 
enabling RBC. The OECD is promoting RBC through the Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises and guidance on due diligence 
for specific sectors, including minerals, extractive, agriculture, garment and footwear, and finance. The Guidelines seek to 
encourage the positive contributions firms can make to economic, environmental and social progress and comprise a set of 
recommendations in all major areas of corporate citizenship, including employment and industrial relations, human rights, 
environment, information disclosure, combating bribery, consumer interests, science and technology, competition, and taxation. 
The Guidelines recommend that enterprises should carry out risk-based due diligence to identify, prevent, or mitigate actual and 
potential adverse impacts and account for how these impacts are addressed.  

The OECD will continue pursuing engagement with more countries on RBC, including enlarging adherence to the Guidelines and 
pursuing the implementation of due diligence in all sectors. 

  



16 – MAKING TRADE WORK FOR ALL 

 

OECD TRADE POLICY PAPERS N°202 © OECD 2017 

Trade agreements have a role to play 

There is a need to do much more to ensure strengthened compliance with international rules of the road. Part 

of this debate has been about the kinds of instruments we should use, and in particular the role of trade 

agreements, especially agreements aiming at deeper integration, in supporting implementation of policies 

across a range of other areas.  

Some issues, like competition or transparency and anti-corruption, are included in trade and economic 

integration agreements because they are seen as essential to ensuring that the expected benefits materialise. In 

other cases, linkages may aim to promote higher standards, including to address concerns about a level 

playing field (e.g. requiring countries to introduce new domestic labour laws), or to promote greater adherence 

to existing international norms (such as ILO Conventions); or to strengthen their enforcement by linking them 

to trade dispute settlement mechanisms; or simply by creating a new avenue for dialogue and pressure. Some 

exhortatory provisions may be aimed at signalling the importance of issues (such as human rights) and 

essentially serve to improve transparency and, subsequently, to increase international attention. 

There are complex issues about who gets to determine compliance, and not everyone sees it as a step forward 

for legitimacy and fairness when their issues are taken up by trade negotiators. Encompassing a wider range of 

issues may mean having to find more ways to tap the expertise and legitimacy of other rule-making processes 

and transparency initiatives.  

Incentives also matter. When standards between countries are very different, or where raising standards 

requires public investment, a country's cost/benefit analysis will look closely at how much trade access is on 

the table, or whether financial or other assistance is being made available. Wider ranges of trade-offs may be 

required.  

Developing countries can fear that differences in standards will be used for protection by advanced 

economies, to tilt the playing field away from their comparative advantage (e.g. where lower wages reflect 

lower productivity in a poor country) and prevent them from being able to harness trade for growth and jobs 

for their citizens. Others argue that these advantages are the result of failure to implement international 

standards (e.g. ILO Conventions). Concerns may also arise where coverage of an issue in a trade agreement is 

perceived as not being in line with principles applying to developing countries in other agreements on the 

same issue (e.g. Common But Differentiated Responsibilities in the context of environmental agreements).  

Trade agreements enable exchange in the face of differences. Trade rules generally leave it to countries to 

determine their own regulations and standards (as long as they are in line with international standards or 

criteria, where they exist) and only require that they be transparent, applied to all countries and to foreigners 

and nationals equally, and be not more burdensome than necessary to achieve their objective (usually assessed 

with reference to the range of existing practices among countries). International regulatory co-operation, 

including with the aim of reaching greater recognition of regulatory equivalence or convergence towards 

international standards, can play an important role in helping manage regulatory differences and reduce 

unnecessary costs for traders. Increased efforts to clarify the impacts of provisions on other issues in trade 

agreements are also needed, including to assess their record in influencing behaviour and outcomes over time, 

all with the aim at making the global economy free, fair and open.  

But how trade agreements are done also matters 

As trade agreements deal increasingly with behind-the-border issues, and GVCs blur the line between policies 

with domestic and international impacts, more questions are arising not just about what is in trade agreements, 

but how they are negotiated. 

Tensions are inevitable: negotiators may ask for much more than they get, governments may use agreements 

to do unpopular but necessary things, and deal-making tends not to be done in public. Countries are 

increasingly experimenting with ways of further engaging and sharing information on negotiations, but 



MAKING TRADE WORK FOR ALL – 17 

 

OECD TRADE POLICY PAPERS N°202 © OECD 2017 

broadening and deepening the conversation on trade will take time. The present climate of post-truth and post-

trust makes this task much more difficult, but also more urgent.  

Trade policy-making needs to become a more open conversation, one where more people can debate the 

issues, assess the pros and cons and feel a greater sense of confidence that the trade-offs inherent in reaching 

agreements make sense. Not everyone will agree, but increasing understanding and broadening the dialogue 

will help to identify new solutions. Better evidence is critical, but evidence that goes beyond the aggregate to 

impacts for communities. An informed public debate can help build a better understanding of the role of trade 

in the economy. Not everyone can be in the negotiating room – and inclusion can also lead to capture by 

dominant lobbies – but everyone can have a much better sense of the choices at stake, and more opportunities 

to give their views on those choices, to inform and be informed by the debate.  

We have to change how we engage. In the impact of trade, context matters, geography matters. So we need to 

go local and engage with people where they live. We need to work much more upstream to extend 

understanding beyond the trade community and before specific agreements. We need to bring trade debates to 

everyday forums, and reconnect it to everyday experience. Engaging more at the local level may also help 

better upstream understanding of the likely impact of trade reforms on communities, including in the context 

of other factors affecting people at the same time, such as housing and credit markets, alternative employment 

possibilities, and the availability of social services.  

This kind of engagement is equally important after the agreement enters into force. This "aftercare" phase can 

be critical in ensuring that businesses, especially SMEs, are aware of the opportunities under the agreement, 

and that impacts are being monitored and addressed; upstream engagement is also critical in helping to 

provide a baseline for this assessment.  

Making trade work for all 

Our overall aim needs to be an integrated policy approach that ensures that international trade is governed by 

fair rules, that all businesses adhere to high standards of conduct, that cross-border tax arrangements are 

transparent and fair, that corruption is combatted, and that labour and environmental standards are respected. 

Trade can help deliver better lives for more people, but to do so it needs internationally-agreed rules that 

establish a level playing field and domestic policies that help people to cope with change and to seize 

opportunities.  

In recent decades the world has been getting closer and more integrated; policy needs to catch up. Only a 

more modern, comprehensive and coherent package of trade, domestic and international policies can help 

ensure that global trade becomes more free, fair and open so that it can do what it is supposed to do: 

contribute to better lives for more people.  

  



18 – MAKING TRADE WORK FOR ALL 

 

OECD TRADE POLICY PAPERS N°202 © OECD 2017 

 

Notes 

 

1.
 

The Pew Research Center has found that, while 60% of Chinese and 52% of Indians think involvement in the 

global economy is a good thing because it provides new markets and opportunities for growth, views are more 

mixed in Europe, ranging from 70% or above (Germany, Sweden and Netherlands) to 64% in the United 

States, 56% in Spain and 51% in France, but only around 44% in Italy and 35% in Greece. While high 

percentages agree that trade is good (91% in Spain, 90% in German, 88% in the United Kingdome, 79% in 

Greece and 73% in France), far fewer believe that it creates jobs (56% in Spain, 43% in Germany, 50% in the 

United Kingdom, 44% in Greece and only 24% in France). In Japan, 58% believe that involvement in the 

global economy is a good thing, and 69% that trade is good, but only 15 % that it creates jobs. Support for 

both trade and its role in job creation is higher across Viet Nam, Malaysia, Chile, Peru and Mexico. In the 

United States, 68% believe that trade is good, but only 20% that it creates jobs, and 52% that free trade 

agreements have been a good thing for the United States, while overall 44% see involvement in the global 

economy is a good thing, while 49% think that it's a bad thing because it lowers wages and costs jobs (Pew 

Research Center, 2017, based on 2015 data). A Gallup poll (2017, based on 2014) data indicated that 54% of 

Americans see trade as an opportunity, versus 38% that see it as a threat. College graduates were significantly 

more likely to see trade as an opportunity than those with only high school education. Results were also 

correlated with overall confidence in the US economy and levels of the trade deficit. An Ipsos poll (2017, 

based on 2016 data) found that, globally, 26% of people felt that opening up the economy to foreign 

businesses and trade was a threat, while 42% saw it as an opportunity (32% did not know). Poll numbers tend 

to be very sensitive to how the question is asked. 

2. As measured by GDP per worker and using a population weighted ranking of top and bottom 20% of regions. 

3. See WTO (2016). Note that an action that targets multiple countries or customs territories is recorded 

according to the number of countries or customs territories affected. Thus, one anti-dumping or countervailing 

investigation involving imports from n sources is counted as n investigations.  

4. See OECD (2017, forthcoming), and the OECD Employment Outlook 2013.  

5. For example, an increase in the ratio of trade to GDP by 10 percentage points has been found on average to 

produce a long-term increase in labour productivity of between 1.4% and 9.6% (Cline, 2004).  

6. Saia, Andrews and Albrizio (2015) find that the ability to learn from the global technological frontier is 

positively related to the proximity to it. Spillovers from the frontier are also stronger in economies that are 

more connected with it via trade, as measured by the intensity of trade with the productivity leader in each 

manufacturing industry. The same is true with respect to the degree of integration in GVCs. 

7.  Underscoring the close relationship between trade and technology, digital trade is again revolutionising the 

availability of goods and services worldwide. 

8. It is not easy to separate trade and non-trade determinants; factors at play include tariffs, trade and transport 

cost reductions, technological developments, and lower costs of production through higher economies of scale 

and finer specialisation in international supply chains. But the literature that suggests that lowering of trade 

barriers has indeed reduced prices. 

9. In a study of 40 countries, the positive trade effect on prices had a pro-poor bias across all countries covered 

(Faijgelbaum and Khandelwal, 2016).  

http://www.gallup.com/poll/167516/americans-remain-positive-foreign-trade.aspx?g_source=attitudes+to+trade&g_medium=search&g_campaign=tiles
https://www.ipsos.com/sites/default/files/2017-03/Power%20to%20the%20people.pdf
https://www.ipsos.com/sites/default/files/2017-03/Power%20to%20the%20people.pdf


MAKING TRADE WORK FOR ALL – 19 

 

OECD TRADE POLICY PAPERS N°202 © OECD 2017 

 

10. Global average most favoured nation (MFN) tariffs, OECD staff calculations based on World Integrated Trade 

solution (WITS) data.  

11. Most of this cost is related to market access barriers around wheat, sugar, beef & veal, poultry and a number 

of vegetables (OECD, 2016c). For these products, tariffs (specific and ad valorem) and quotas and licensing 

on both the raw product and processed forms (such as flour in the case of wheat) were the main source of costs 

imposed on consumers – tariffs alone stood at 12.4% for cereals and preparations; 15.0% for animal products 

(meat) and 20.2% for sugar (figures drawn from EU Notification to the WTO Committee on Agriculture, 

G/AG/N/EU/33, dated 13 January 2017, available at www.wto.org). 

12. OECD staff calculations based on data from the USITC (https://hts.usitc.gov/current) and the Official Journal 

of the European Union, L294, Vol. 59 dated 28 October 2016.  

13. OECD staff calculations based on the OECD STAN Bilateral Trade Database by Industry and End-use 

category (BTDIxE) 2016 data. 

14. OECD staff calculations based on TiVA data (December 2016 release). Note that earlier studies aimed at 

measuring value added calculated the content of US value added in US imports from Mexico as being 

significantly higher, up to 40% (see Koopman et al., 2010).  

15. Improved trade facilitation arrangements that raise the speed and efficiency of border procedures in all 

economies are assumed to reduce trade costs by 1.3% uniformly across all sectors in all countries (estimate of 

the global average derived from the OECD’s Trade Facilitation Indicators). Overall, this would raise world 

GDP by about 1.5% and world trade by 1.7%, substantial effects in the context of recent annual growth rates. 

16.  Levinson (2016) shows that the upswing in US manufacturing since 2009 has led to negligible employment 

growth (a 21% increase in output was accompanied by only a 5% increase in employment). Manufacturing 

jobs have shown increasing skill requirements and severely diminished opportunities for workers without 

education beyond high school. Moreover, manufacturing wages are below those in many other industries and 

continue to decline in relative terms. Changes in manufacturing processes have also seen far fewer factories 

with large numbers of workers. The proportion of manufacturing worker who are female has fallen from 32% 

in 1993 to 27% in 2016, reflecting the fact that women account for a large share of employment in some of the 

industries that experienced the steepest declines in employment such as apparel, textiles and electrical 

manufacturing.  

17.  That manufacturing employment has been falling since the early 2000s while overall employment has not 

changed that suggests that jobs have also been gradually shifting from manufacturing-related tasks to services. 

18. An earlier study (Pursell, 1999) cites an Industry Commission finding in 1995, after the local content plan had 

been abolished and tariffs had been reduced to 27.5%, that the protection of the automotive industry was 

equivalent to a tax of about AUD 3 700 on each car sold and AUD 43 000 for each person employed in the 

auto assembly and component sector.   

19. Based on analysis using the OECD TFI, which measure performance across key elements of trade facilitation 

covered under the WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement for 163 countries; the analysis uses bilateral costs 

estimates from the UN ESCAP-World Bank Trade Costs Dataset.  

20.  See OECD Services Trade Restrictiveness Index (STRI) and FDI Regulatory Restrictiveness Index.  

21. Using mark-ups over costs as an indication of the strength of competition. Calculations by OECD staff based 

on the STRI. 

file://///FS-CH-1.main.oecd.org/Users3/Patterson_M/Desktop/www.wto.org
https://hts.usitc.gov/current


20 – MAKING TRADE WORK FOR ALL 

 

OECD TRADE POLICY PAPERS N°202 © OECD 2017 

 

22. Trade barriers created by ineffective policies, and burdensome rules and procedures can create incentives to 

engage in corrupt behaviour. Trade facilitation reforms underpin the ability of market participants and 

stakeholders to fully understand the conditions and constraints for entering and operating in a market, as well 

as a non-discretionary and consistent application of rules guaranteeing efficiency and integrity in border 

agencies. Recent surveys show that the private sector considers corruption and burdensome procedures at the 

border to be a key obstacle, particularly in the case of low- and lower-middle income countries (OECD/WTO, 

2015). Loss of revenue caused by customs-related corruption is estimated to cost World Customs Organization 

(WCO) members at least USD 2 billion in customs revenue each year (Michael, 2012). 

23. This could include high-quality spending on education, health and research and development as well as green 

infrastructure that all bring significant output gains in the long run and foster inclusiveness. (OECD, 2016d).  

24.  OECD estimates that, in the current environment and with monetary policy unchanged, a permanent 

investment-led stimulus of half of a percentage point of GDP that would be debt-financed for a few years is 

estimated to increase output by 0.4-0.6% in the first year in the large advanced economies. Over the long term, 

output gains can rise to 2%, if the stimulus is financed after three-four years through non-distortionary taxes or 

a cut in other spending, with neither of these factors affecting potential output (OECD 2016d).  

25.  Recent evidence based on OECD countries suggests that increasing the quality of, and the time spent in, 

education yields large growth gains by raising skills and thereby productivity (Fournier and Johansson, 2016). 

In addition, an education reform that aims at encouraging completion of secondary education can decrease 

income inequality (OECD 2016d). 

26. The OECD Recommendation of the Council on Common Approaches for Officially Supported Export Credits 

and Environmental and Social Due Diligence. 

27. The 2017 OECD Recommendation on Public Integrity also constitutes a useful reference to strengthen the 

implementation of a comprehensive integrity framework that can be easily adapted to evolving and emerging 

integrity risks in trade (OECD, 2016h). 

28. ILO core labour standards cover child labour, forced labour, discrimination in employment, and the right to 

organise and bargain collectively. The ILO Decent Work encompasses opportunities for work that is 

productive and delivers a fair income, security in the workplace and social protection for families, better 

prospects for personal development and social integration, freedom for people to express their concerns, 

organise and participate in the decisions that affect their lives and equality of opportunity and treatment for all 

women and men. See www.ilo.org.  

29. For example, Harvard Business School tracked the performance of companies over 18 years and found that 

companies with strong environmental, social and governance systems and practices outperformed “low 

sustainability” companies (Eccles et al., 2012). A recent French study covering 8 500 French enterprises also 

showed a 13% difference in economic performance on average between enterprises that implemented 

responsible business conduct and those that did not (Benhamou et al., 2016). 

http://www.ilo.org/


MAKING TRADE WORK FOR ALL – 21 

 

OECD TRADE POLICY PAPERS N°202 © OECD 2017 

 

References 

Acemoglu, D and P Restrepo (2017) “Robots and jobs: Evidence from US labor markets” NBER Working Paper, 

No. 23285. 

Arntz, M., T. Gregory and U. Zierahn  (2016), "The risk of automation for jobs in OECD countries: A comparative 

analysis", OECD Social, Employment and Migration Working Papers, No. 189, OECD Publishing, Paris. 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5jlz9h56dvq7-en. 

Australian Government Productivity Commission (2014), Australia’s automotive manufacturing industry: 

Productivity Commission Inquiry Report, N°70, 31 March, Commonwealth of Australia, Canberra. 

Autor, D.H., D. Dorn and G.H. Henderson (2016), “The China shock: Learning from labour market adjustment to 

large changes in trade”. NBER Working Paper, No. 21906. 

Benhamou, S. and Diaye, M. (2016), Corporate social responsibility and competitiveness. Evaluation and strategic 

approach. www.strategie.gouv.fr/sites/strategie.gouv.fr/files/atoms/files/synthese-rse_en.pdf. 

Beverelli C., M. Kukenova and N. Rocha (2011), “Are you experienced? Survival and recovery of trade relations 

after the banking crisis”, WTO Working Paper Series N. 2011-03, World Trade Organization. 

Borjas, G. J., R.B. Freeman and L. F. Katz. (1997) ‘How Much do Immigration and Trade Affect Labor Market 

Outcome?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Vol. 1, pp.1–90. 

British Business Bank (2016), Small Business Equity Investment Tracker, 2016, Beahurst, United Kingdom 

(available at http://british-business-bank.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/05/97-Small-Business-Equity-

Investment-Tracker-Report.pdf) 

Causa, O., M. Hermann and N. Ruiz (2016), “The distributional impact of structural reforms”, OECD Economics 

Department Working Papers, No. 1342, OECD Publishing, Paris, http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5jln041nkpwc-

en 

Cline, W. (2004), Trade policy and global poverty, Peterson Institute for International Economics, 

Washington, DC. 

Dabla-Norris, E., Kocher K., Ricki, F., Suphaphiphat, N, and E. Tsounta (2015), “Causes and consequences of 

income inequality: A global perspective”, IMF Discussion Note, SDN/15/13, June 2015. 

Eccles, G., Ioannou, R., Serafeim, I., (2012), The impact of corporate sustainability on organisational processes and 

performance, NBER Working Paper, No. 17950, March 2012.  

Faijgelbaum, P. and Khandelwal, A. 2016. “Measuring the unequal gains from trade,” The Quarterly Journal of 

Economics, Vol. 131. 

Feenstra, R. C. and G. H. Hanson (1999) ‘Productivity measurement and the impact of trade and technology on 

wages: Estimates for the U.S., 1972–1990’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 114, pp. 907–40. 

Feenstra, R. C. and G. H. Hanson (2003), “Global production sharing and rising inequality: A survey of trade and 

wages”, in Choi, Kwan and James Harrigan (eds), Handbook of international trade, Basil Blackwell, 

New York. 

Fournier, J.M. and A. Johansson (2016, forthcoming), “The effect of the size and the mix of public spending on 

growth and inequality”, OECD Economics Department Working Papers, OECD Publications, Paris. 

Furman, J., Russ, K. and J. Shambaugh (2017), “US tariffs are an arbitrary and regressive tax”, VoxEU Column, 

available at: http://voxeu.org/article/us-tariffs-are-arbitrary-and-regressive-tax  

Gallup (2014), “Americans remain positive about foreign trade”, available at 

www.gallup.com/poll/167516/americans-remain-positive-foreign-

trade.aspx?g_source=attitudes+to+trade&g_medium=search&g_campaign=tiles. 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5jlz9h56dvq7-en
file://///FS-CH-1.main.oecd.org/Users3/Patterson_M/Desktop/www.strategie.gouv.fr/sites/strategie.gouv.fr/files/atoms/files/synthese-rse_en.pdf
http://british-business-bank.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/05/97-Small-Business-Equity-Investment-Tracker-Report.pdf
http://british-business-bank.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/05/97-Small-Business-Equity-Investment-Tracker-Report.pdf
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5jln041nkpwc-en
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5jln041nkpwc-en
http://voxeu.org/article/us-tariffs-are-arbitrary-and-regressive-tax
http://www.gallup.com/poll/167516/americans-remain-positive-foreign-trade.aspx?g_source=attitudes+to+trade&g_medium=search&g_campaign=tiles
http://www.gallup.com/poll/167516/americans-remain-positive-foreign-trade.aspx?g_source=attitudes+to+trade&g_medium=search&g_campaign=tiles


22 – MAKING TRADE WORK FOR ALL 

 

OECD TRADE POLICY PAPERS N°202 © OECD 2017 

Helpman, E. (2016), “Globalisation and wage inequality”, Centre for Economic Policy Discussion Paper, 

No. 11701, CEPR, London. 

Hermansen, M., N. Ruiz and O. Causa (2016), "The distribution of the growth dividends", OECD Economics 

Department Working Papers, No. 1343, OECD Publishing, Paris. http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/7c8c6cc1-en 

Hufbauer and Lowry (2012) Hufbauer, G.C., and Lowry, S. 2012. “US tire tariffs: Saving few jobs at high cost”, 

Policy Brief PB12-9, Peterson Institute for International Economics. 

IMF (2017), “Understanding the downward trend in labour income shares”, in World Economic Outlook, Chapter 3, 

April, Washington D.C. 

IMF, WBG, WTO (2017), Making trade and engine of growth for all: The case for trade and for policies to 

facilitate adjustment, note prepared by staff of the IMF, World Bank, WTO for the G20. 

Ipsos (2017), “Power to the people Part 2”, poll available www.ipsos.com/sites/default/files/2017-

03/Power%20to%20the%20people.pdf. 

Koopman, R., W. Powers, Z. Wang and S. Wei (2010), “Give credit where credit is due: Tracing value added in 

global production chains,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper, No. 16426.   

Kowalski, P., J. Lopez-Gonzalez, A. Ragoussis and C. Ugarte, (2015), “Participation of developing countries in 

global value chains: Implications for trade and trade-related policies”, OECD Trade Policy Papers, No. 179, 

OECD Publishing, Paris. http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5js33lfw0xxn-en 

Levinson, Mark (2016), “Job creation in the manufacturing revival”, Congressional Research Service Report, June 

28, 2016, Congressional Research Service, Washington DC.  

Michael, B. (2012), “Do customs trade facilitation programs help reduce customs-related corruption?” International 

Journal of Public Administration, Vol. 35:2, pp. 81-97. 

Newfarmer, R. and M. Sztajerowska (2012), “Trade and employment in a fast-changing world”, in OECD (2012), 

Policy Priorities for International Trade and Jobs, OECD Publishing, Paris. 

Obstfeld (2016), “Get on track with trade”, Finance and Development, December 2016, Vol. 53, No. 4, 

www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/fandd/2016/12/obstfeld.htm 

OECD (2017, forthcoming), OECD Employment Outlook 2017, OECD Publishing, Paris. 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/empl_outlook-2017-en. 

OECD (2017a, forthcoming), OECD Economic Outlook, June 2017, OECD Publishing, Paris 

OECD (2016), OECD Regional Outlook 2016: Productive regions for inclusive societies, OECD Publishing, Paris. 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264260245-en. 

OECD (2016a), OECD regions at a glance 2016, OECD Publishing, Paris. http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/reg_glance-

2016-en 

OECD (2016b), Entrepreneurship at a glance 2016, OECD Publishing, Paris. 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/entrepreneur_aag-2016-en. 

OECD (2016c), Agricultural policy monitoring and evaluation 2016, OECD Publishing, Paris. 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr_pol-2016-en 

OECD (2016d), OECD economic outlook, Volume 2016 Issue 2, OECD Publishing, Paris. 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/eco_outlook-v2016-2-en. 

OECD (2016e), “Estimating GVC participation in the agriculture and food sectors”, OECD, Paris, 

TAD/TC/CA/WP(20161/PART1/FINAL. 

OECD (2016f), “Digital convergence and beyond: Innovation, investment and competition in communication 

policy and regulation for the 21st Century”, OECD Digital Economy Papers, No. 251, OECD Publishing, 

Paris. http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5jlwvzzj5wvl-en. 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/7c8c6cc1-en
http://www.ipsos.com/sites/default/files/2017-03/Power%20to%20the%20people.pdf
http://www.ipsos.com/sites/default/files/2017-03/Power%20to%20the%20people.pdf
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16426.pdf
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16426.pdf
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5js33lfw0xxn-en
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/fandd/2016/12/obstfeld.htm
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/empl_outlook-2017-en
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264260245-en
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/reg_glance-2016-en
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/reg_glance-2016-en
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/entrepreneur_aag-2016-en
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr_pol-2016-en
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/eco_outlook-v2016-2-en
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5jlwvzzj5wvl-en


MAKING TRADE WORK FOR ALL – 23 

 

OECD TRADE POLICY PAPERS N°202 © OECD 2017 

OECD (2016g), State-owned enterprises as global competitors: A challenge or an opportunity?, OECD Publishing, 

Paris. http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264262096-en  

OECD (2016h), Fighting the hidden tariff: Global trade without corruption, Background document for the 2016 

OECD Integrity Forum, www.oecd.org/cleangovbiz/2016-Integrity-Forum-Background-Report.pdf. 

OECD (2015), In it together: Why less inequality benefits all, OECD Publishing, Paris. 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264235120-en. 

OECD (2015a), Implementation of the WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement: The potential impact on trade Costs, 

Policy Brief, OECD, Paris, www.oecd.org/trade/WTO-TF-Implementation-Policy-Brief_EN_2015_06.pdf. 

OECD (2015b), Economic policy reforms 2015: Going for growth, OECD Publishing, Paris, 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/growth-2015-en 

OECD (2013), OECD skills outlook 2013: First results from the survey of adult skills, OECD Publishing, Paris. 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264204256-en.  

OECD (2012), Policy priorities for international trade and jobs, OECD Publishing, Paris. 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264180178-en.  

OECD (2011), Divided we stand: Why inequality keeps rising, OECD Publishing, Paris. 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264119536-en. 

OECD/EU Intellectual Property Office (2016), Trade in counterfeit and pirated goods: Mapping the economic 

impact www.keepeek.com/Digital-Asset-Management/oecd/governance/trade-in-counterfeit-and-pirated-

goods_9789264252653-en#.WPigoW-GOUk#page19 

OECD/World Bank (2015), Inclusive Global Value Chains. Policy options in trade and complementary areas for 

GVC Integration by small and medium enterprises and low-income developing countries, Report prepared 

for submission to G20 Trade Ministers Meeting, Istanbul, Turkey, 6 October 2015. 

OECD/WTO (2015), Aid for trade at a glance 2015: Reducing trade costs for inclusive, sustainable growth, WTO, 

Geneva/OECD Publishing, Paris. http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/aid_glance-2015-en  

Pew Research Center (2017), “The public's mixed views on trade”, presentation by Bruce Stokes, Director, Global 

Economic Attitudes, OECD 25 April. Available at www.pewresearch.org. 

Pursell, Gary (1999), Australia's experience with local content programs in the auto industry: Lessons for India and 

other developing countries, available at http://documents.worldbank.org. 

PWC (2015), Pricewaterhouse Coopers / National Venture Capital Association MoneyTree™ Report, Data: 

Thomson Reuters. Accessible at: www.pwc.com/us/en/technology/moneytree.html. 

Saia, A., D. Andrews and S. Albrizio (2015), “Productivity spillovers from the global frontier and public policy: 

Industry-level evidence”, OECD Economics Department Working Papers, No. 1238, OECD Publishing, 

Paris. http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5js03hkvxhmr-en  

Wagner J. (2015), “A survey of empirical studies using transaction level data on exports and imports”, CESIS 

Electronic Working Paper Series, Paper No. 416, The Royal Institute of Technology, Centre of Excellence 

for Science and Innovation Studies (CESIS), July 2015, https://static.sys.kth.se/itm/wp/cesis/cesiswp416.pdf 

World Bank (2016), World Development Indicators 2016, World Bank Group, Washington DC. 

World Bank (2010), Trade adjustment costs in developing countries: Impacts, determinants and policy responses, 

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, The World Bank, Washington D.C. 

World Trade Organisation (2016), Overview of developments in the international trading environment: Annual 

report by the Director-General, (Mid-October 2015 to mid-October 2016), WT/TPR/OV/19 dated 

21 November.   

http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264262096-en
http://www.oecd.org/cleangovbiz/2016-Integrity-Forum-Background-Report.pdf
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264235120-en
http://www.oecd.org/trade/WTO-TF-Implementation-Policy-Brief_EN_2015_06.pdf
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/growth-2015-en
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264204256-en
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264180178-en
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264119536-en
http://www.keepeek.com/Digital-Asset-Management/oecd/governance/trade-in-counterfeit-and-pirated-goods_9789264252653-en#.WPigoW-GOUk
http://www.keepeek.com/Digital-Asset-Management/oecd/governance/trade-in-counterfeit-and-pirated-goods_9789264252653-en#.WPigoW-GOUk
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/aid_glance-2015-en
file://///FS-CH-1.main.oecd.org/Users3/Patterson_M/Desktop/www.pewresearch.org
http://documents.worldbank.org/
http://www.pwc.com/us/en/technology/moneytree.html
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5js03hkvxhmr-en
https://static.sys.kth.se/itm/wp/cesis/cesiswp416.pdf


24 – MAKING TRADE WORK FOR ALL 

 

OECD TRADE POLICY PAPERS N°202 © OECD 2017 

 

Annex 1.  

 

Figures 

Figure 1. Productivity gaps are widening and wages stagnating at laggard firms 

 

  

Note: Frontier firms are the 5% of firms with the highest labour productivity by year and sector. Industries included are 
manufacturing and business services, excluding the financial sector, for firms with at least 20 employees. 

Source: OECD (2016d). 

Frontier firms (top 5%)

Non-frontier firms

90

100

110

120

130

140

2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013

Index, 2001 = 100 
Labour productivity 

90

100

110

120

130

140

2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013

Index, 2001 = 100 

Real compensation per employee 



MAKING TRADE WORK FOR ALL – 25 

 

OECD TRADE POLICY PAPERS N°202 © OECD 2017 

Figure 2. Socio-economic background matters for literacy 

 

* 1. Note by Turkey: 
The information in this document with reference to “Cyprus” relates to the southern part of the Island. There is no 
single authority representing both Turkish and Greek Cypriot people on the Island. Turkey recognises the Turkish 
Republic of Northern Cyprus (TRNC). Until a lasting and equitable solution is found within the context of the 
United Nations, Turkey shall preserve its position concerning the “Cyprus issue.” 

2. Note by all the European Union Member States of the OECD and the European Union: 
The Republic of Cyprus is recognised by all members of the United Nations with the exception of Turkey. The 
information in this document relates to the area under the effective control of the Government of the Republic of 
Cyprus. 

Slope of the socio-economic gradient: Score-point difference associated with one level increase in parents' 

education  

Source: OECD (2013). 

Figure 3. Global trade and global growth are positively correlated 

Global trade volume, trillion USD at 2010 prices, logarithmic scale 

 

Source: OECD (2016d). 

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

16-65-year olds 16-24-year olds

1

10

1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015

1st oil shock 

2nd oil shock 

Asian crisis 

Dotcom crash 

Global crisis 



26 – MAKING TRADE WORK FOR ALL 

 

OECD TRADE POLICY PAPERS N°202 © OECD 2017 

Figure 4. Trade openness is strongly correlated with rising incomes of the poor 

Change in openness and income of the poor, 1993-2008 (%) 

 

Note: EMDEs with average population greater than 20 million. Dot size is proportional to population 

Authors’ calculations based on Lakner-Milanovic (2013) World Panel Income Distribution dataset, 
and World Development Indicators. 

Source: IMF et al. (2017). 

  

ARG

BGD

BRA CHN

COL

EGY

IDN

IND

KEN

MAR

MEX

MYS

NGA

PAK

PER

PHL

POL

ROM

RUS

THA

TUR

TZA

UGA

UKR

VEN

VNM

ZAF

-60

-30

0

30

60

90

120

150

-40 -20 0 20 40 60 80 100

C
h

a
n

g
e
 i
n

 r
e
a
l 

in
co

m
e
 o

f 
lo

w
e
st

 q
u

in
ti

le

Change in openness

(percentage points)



MAKING TRADE WORK FOR ALL – 27 

 

OECD TRADE POLICY PAPERS N°202 © OECD 2017 

Figure 5. Developing and emerging economies play a more important role in trade 

a. World export shares by country grouping 

 

 

b. World import shares by country grouping 

 

 

Source: OECD calculations based on the World Integrated Trade Solution (WITS) database. 

0%

10%

20%

30%

40%

50%

60%

70%

80%

90%

100%

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015

BRIICS G7 ROW

0%

10%

20%

30%

40%

50%

60%

70%

80%

90%

100%

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015

G7 BRIICS ROW



28 – MAKING TRADE WORK FOR ALL 

 

OECD TRADE POLICY PAPERS N°202 © OECD 2017 

Figure 6. Tariffs for consumers have dropped significantly since 1990 

MFN import tariffs on electronics and other product categories 

1992 

 

2015 

 

Source: World Integrated Trade Solution Database, simple average MFN tariff rates for imports from all countries. 

  

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

Agricultural materials Chemicals Food Manufactures Electrical machinery,
apparatus and

appliances

Telecommunications and
sound-recording and

reproduction equipment

China European Union Japan United States

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

Agricultural Materials Chemicals Food Manufactures Electrical machinery,
apparatus and

appliances

Telecommunications and
sound-recording and

reproduction equipment

China European Union Japan United States



MAKING TRADE WORK FOR ALL – 29 

 

OECD TRADE POLICY PAPERS N°202 © OECD 2017 

Figure 7. Trade reforms that lower price and increase choice favour low income earners 

 

Example: Compared to existing trade patterns, in Germany (DEU) the real income of the poorest 10% of the 
population would be 56% lower if no trade was taking place; the gap for the richest 10%is far smaller (21%). 

* 1. Note by Turkey: 

The information in this document with reference to “Cyprus” relates to the southern part of the Island. There is 
no single authority representing both Turkish and Greek Cypriot people on the Island. Turkey recognises the 
Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (TRNC). Until a lasting and equitable solution is found within the context of 
the United Nations, Turkey shall preserve its position concerning the “Cyprus issue.” 

2. Note by all the European Union Member States of the OECD and the European Union: 

The Republic of Cyprus is recognised by all members of the United Nations with the exception of Turkey. The 
information in this document relates to the area under the effective control of the Government of the Republic of 
Cyprus. 

 

Source: Faijgelbaum and Khandelwal (2016, Table V) cited in IMF et al. (2017); Country classification is from WEO. 

AUS 

AUT 

BEL 
BGR 

BRA 

CAN 

CHN 

CYP 

CZE 

DEU 

DNK 

ESP 

EST 

FIN 

FRA GBR 

GRC 

HUN 

IDN 
IND 

IRL 

ITA 

JPN 

KOR 

LTU 

LUX 

LVA 

MEX 

MLT 

NLD 

POL PRT 

ROM 

RUS 

SVK 

SVN 

SWE 

TUR 

TWN 

USA 
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100

T
o

p
 d

e
c
ile

 -
 R

e
a
l 
in

c
o
m

e
 L

ls
s
 f
ro

m
 c

lo
s
in

g
 o

ff
 T

ta
d
e

 

Bottom decile - Real income loss from closing off trade 

Emerging market economy 

Advanced economy 



30 – MAKING TRADE WORK FOR ALL 

 

OECD TRADE POLICY PAPERS N°202 © OECD 2017 

Figure 8. Over 40% of the value of China's manufacturing exports comes from other countries 

Source of value added in China’s manufacturing exports 

 

Source: Staff calculations based on OECD-WTO TiVA data. 

  

51.3% 51.3% 50.4% 48.9% 50.4% 
52.0% 54.2% 

57.0% 
60.4% 60.9% 59.8% 59.9% 

3.6% 3.5% 3.8% 
4.2% 

4.0% 
3.9% 

4.1% 
3.9% 

3.3% 3.7% 3.9% 3.9% 
10.6% 9.8% 10.3% 11.2% 10.7% 

9.5% 
8.6% 

7.7% 
6.8% 6.5% 6.6% 6.0% 4.4% 4.1% 4.7% 5.1% 5.1% 

5.2% 
4.7% 

4.3% 
3.4% 3.7% 3.7% 3.4% 

8.6% 9.2% 9.0% 9.1% 
9.0% 8.3% 8.0% 

7.8% 7.4% 
7.2% 6.6% 6.9% 

6.9% 7.3% 6.5% 6.2% 6.2% 5.8% 5.6% 
5.2% 4.8% 4.8% 4.8% 4.7% 

14.6% 14.8% 15.3% 15.4% 14.6% 15.4% 14.8% 14.2% 14.0% 13.2% 14.4% 15.2% 

0%

10%

20%

30%

40%

50%

60%

70%

80%

90%

100%

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011

Other NAFTA EU28 Korea Japan ASEAN Domestic



MAKING TRADE WORK FOR ALL – 31 

 

OECD TRADE POLICY PAPERS N°202 © OECD 2017 

Figure 9. The world gains a lot from international economic integration 

Medium-term GDP level effect of different trade policy scenarios, in % 

 
Source: OECD METRO model and OECD calculations. 

 

 

Figure 10. Cutting the costs of trading brings gains to all countries, especially developing countries 

Overall potential trade cost reductions by income group 

 

Source: OECD (2015a). 

-2.0

-1.5

-1.0

-0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

-2.0

-1.5

-1.0

-0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

Implementation of trade
facilitation measures

Imposing of trade restrictions in
major economies

World Countries imposing restrictions Other countries

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

Low income Lower middle income Upper middle income High income
non-OECD

OECD

% 



32 – MAKING TRADE WORK FOR ALL 

 

OECD TRADE POLICY PAPERS N°202 © OECD 2017 

Figure 11. GVCs amplify the costs of protection 

 

The final price of a product with value added of 100, where n Is the number of border crossing, by different import tariff 
rates 

Source: OECD (2012). 

 
Figure 12. Taxes can be designed to benefit growth and equity 

Growth and equity effects of decreases in selected tax and contributions 

 

Source: OECD (2016d), based on Cournède, B., A. Pina and A. Goujard (2014), “Reconciling Fiscal Consolidation with 
Growth and Equity”, OECD Journal: Economic Studies, Vol. 2013 Issue 1. 

  

104.1 110.5 
122.1 

148.8 

109.5 
125.8 

159.4 

259.6 

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

2% 5% 10% 20%

n = 5 n = 10



MAKING TRADE WORK FOR ALL – 33 

 

OECD TRADE POLICY PAPERS N°202 © OECD 2017 

Figure 13. New provisions in trade agreements 

a. Trade agreements increasingly include "deep" provisions 

 

 

b. Including on a range of new issues beyond trade 

 

Source: OECD, based on WTO RTAs Database. 

  

0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90

Environment

E-commerce

Export restrictions

SPS

TBT

IPR

State-owned enterprises

Competition

Public procurement

Anti-corruption

Transparency

Movement of capital

Investment

Movement of people

Services

Number of RTAs signed 2001-2011  

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

N
u

m
b

e
r 

o
f 

R
T

A
s

 



34 – MAKING TRADE WORK FOR ALL 

 

OECD TRADE POLICY PAPERS N°202 © OECD 2017 

Figure 14. Top counterfeit product categories as % of world imports, 2013 

 

Source: OECD calculations based on data from OECD-EUIPO (2016). 

0%

2%

4%

6%

8%

10%

12%

14%

% of world imports in the 
product category 


