









































Citizens and businesses now expect government 
information to be readily available online, easy to 
find and understand, and at low or no cost. 
Governments have many reasons to meet these 
expectations by investing in a comprehensive 
public-sector digital transformation. Our analysis 
suggests that capturing the full potential of 
govern ment digitization could free up to $1 trillion 
annually in economic value worldwide, through 
improved cost and operational performance. 
Shared services, greater collaboration and 
inte gra tion, improved fraud management, and 
productivity enhancements enable system-wide 
efficiencies. At a time of increasing budgetary pres-
sures, governments at national, regional, and local 
levels cannot afford to miss out on those savings.

Indeed, governments around the world are doing 
their best to meet citizen demand and capture 
benefits. More than 130 countries have online 
services. For example, Estonia’s 1.3 million 

residents can use electronic identification cards 
to vote, pay taxes, and access more than 160 
services online, from unemployment benefits  
to property registration. Turkey’s Social Aid 
Infor ma tion System has consolidated multiple 
government data sources into one system to 
provide citizens with better access and faster 
decisions on its various aid programs. The 
United Kingdom’s gov.uk site serves as a one-stop 
information hub for all government departments. 
Such online services also provide greater access 
for rural populations, improve quality of life for 
those with physical infirmities, and offer options 
for those whose work and lifestyle demands 
don’t conform to typical daytime office hours.

However, despite all the progress made, most 
governments are far from capturing the full 
benefits of digitization. To do so, they need  
to take their digital transformations deeper, 
beyond the provision of online services through 

The full benefits of digitization could be huge, but to realize them, governments need  

to tackle the factors that make many e-government efforts fall short of their promise.

Cem Dilmegani,  

Bengi Korkmaz, and 

Martin Lundqvist

S
c
o
tt

 B
a
k
a
l

D E C E M B E R  2 0 1 4

B u s i n e s s  T e c h n o l o g y  o f f i c e

Public-sector digitization:  
The trillion-dollar challenge



2

e-government portals, into the broader business 
of government itself. That means looking for 
opportunities to improve productivity, collabo-
ration, scale, process efficiency, and innovation.

The public-sector challenge

Digital transformations require changes, to both 
processes and IT systems, that are more chal-
lenging to implement in the public sector than in 
the private sector. A joint study by McKinsey and 
Oxford University found that public-sector IT 
projects requiring business change were six 
times more likely to experience cost overruns 
and 20 percent more likely to run over schedule 
than such projects in the private sector.1

The public sector must cope with additional 
management issues, including multiple agencies, 
a range of organizational mandates and constit-
uencies, longer appropriations timelines, and 
the challenge of maintaining strategic continuity 
even as political administrations change.

Therefore, it is important that private-sector 
companies supporting public IT transformations 
understand that the public sector operates in a 
different context. For example, it can be challeng-
ing to set a specific target, build consensus, align 
on a leadership structure, secure funding, and 
meet implementation timelines.

Similarly, when systems and data are owned by 
different departments and functions, on a range 
of platforms and with differing taxonomies and 
access requirements, it can be difficult to invest 
at scale and generate sufficient economies. Silos, 
fragmentation, and the absence of a central owner 
for nationwide IT infrastructure and common 
components can make it hard to connect the 
internal “plumbing” to create a seamless 

experience for the end user, be it a government 
worker, a business user, an average citizen, or 
another intergovernmental office. It doesn’t 
make the task easier when the complexity of 
large-scale digital projects requires specialized 
skills and expertise that come at a high price and 
are often in short supply. In consequence, many 
e-government efforts fall short of their promise.

Achieving comprehensive 
public digitization 

While digital transformation in the public sector 
is particularly challenging, a number of successful 
government initiatives show that by translating 
private-sector best practices into the public context 
it is possible to achieve broader and deeper public- 
sector digitization. Each of the six most impor-
tant levers is best described by success stories.

1.  Win government-wide and agency-deep 
commitment to specific digital targets. 
The launch of gov.uk in 2012 marked the 
creation of one of the most accessible digital-
government services in the world. Its success 
in providing citizens, businesses, and govern-
ment users with accurate, streamlined, and 
comprehensive services is the result of strong 
central leadership and implementation 
provided by the UK’s Government Digital 
Service. This unit of the government’s Cabinet 
Office was charged with overseeing the 
country’s digital strategy and implementing 
the transformation of its service provisioning 
to what it described as “digital by default.”2  
By including seasoned digital leaders from  
different public departments, the Government 
Digital Service gained the needed experience 
and expertise, as well as the buy-in of those 
departments. A clear mandate helped steer 
the implementation and build awareness.  

Takeaways

Digital transformation  

in government is critical  

to meeting citizen demand 

and freeing up savings.

Strides have been made,  

but the public sector must 

go further to see the full 

potential of digitization.

Pulling six levers, including 

establishing government-

wide coordina tion of IT 

investments and using  

big data in decision making, 

can help.

1 For other findings from  
the McKinsey and Oxford 
University research,  
see Michael Bloch, Sven 
Blumberg, and Jürgen 
Laartz, “Delivering large-
scale IT projects on time,  
on budget, and on value,” 
October 2012, mckinsey.com.

2 Government Digital 
Strategy: December  
2013, UK Cabinet Office, 
2013, gov.uk.



3

The unit worked to sustain momentum for  
the sometimes-challenging change efforts  
by being as transparent as possible. It 
published its strategy, scheduled targets for 
each department, and reported performance 
against those targets frequently. According  
to government estimates, gov.uk saved  
£42 million in government spending within a 
year of its launch. In October 2013, it had, for 
the first time, two million visits in one day.3

2.  Establish government-wide coordination 
of IT investments. To better coordinate 
large-scale IT projects across the government 
and generate cost efficiencies, Denmark 
established IT Projektraad, a digitization 
council reporting to the Ministry of Finance, 
to function as its central IT steering group. 
The agency’s goal is to ensure that the 
benefits and gains targeted in a project’s 
business case are realized. This has allowed  
it to apply a test-and-learn approach, using 
pilot projects to ensure investments are 
effective and then bringing lessons learned  
to other agencies. To that end, the digitization 
agency requires government institutions to 
adhere to specific methodologies and guide-
lines when planning their IT investments.  
It also develops and shares best practices, 
conducts risk evaluations for projects over a 
certain cost threshold, participates in project 
reviews, and helps oversee the government’s 
IT project pipeline. Such central oversight  
has helped the Danish government reduce 
unnecessary investments, enforce common 
standards, and build greater project synergies. 

3.  Redesign processes with the end user  
in mind. In 2011, the Netherlands released 
i-NUP, its government-wide implementation 
agenda for e-government services, to priori-
tize citizen- or user-centered design by 

boosting convenience and trimming red tape. 
One of the implementation rules, for instance, 
states, “We do not pose superfluous questions. 
Data included in one of the basic registrations 
will not be asked for again.”4 Under the plan, 
municipalities would serve as “citizens’ desks” 
and be the first line of contact to field or refer 
questions, supported by a website, customer-
contact center, and central phone number. As 
of 2014, most municipalities are connected to 
a single access number.  
 
The plan called for a similar overhaul of the 
country’s government-to-business services. 
To make that happen, the Dutch launched a 
comprehensive digital-infrastructure project 
led by the national digital-governance agency, 
Logius. The project steering group included 
central and local governments and public IT 
agencies. Together, using world-class stan dards, 
they defined the technical specifications for the 
13 central databases involved and their inter - 
connections. They also created a government-
wide dashboard to highlight project status 
and risks and used conferences and social 
media to disseminate and refine key lessons 
with public-sector IT managers around the 
country. As a result of these initiatives, 
physical visits to municipalities and govern-
ment offices have decreased significantly. For 
example, the number of visits to Rotterdam 
municipality offices decreased by around  
50 percent from 2010 to 2013.

4.  Hire and nurture the right talent. Digital 
transformations call for specialized skills that 
are in high demand and therefore increasingly 
hard to come by. Government organizations 
often struggle to compete for such talent, 
since the private sector frequently can offer 
higher wages, a more entrepreneurial culture, 
and more clearly defined career paths.

3 £10bn saved in 2012/13: 
Efficiency and Reform 
2012/13 summary  
report, UK Cabinet  
Office, 2013, gov.uk.

4 One digital government: 
better service, greater 
convenience, Netherlands 
Ministry of the Interior  
and Kingdom Relations, 
2011, e-overheid.nl.



4

However, a few governments have found ways 
to attract or nurture IT talent for their digital 
projects. In South Korea, for instance, a signi f - 
 icant portion of government IT infrastructure  
is centralized in a few data centers providing 
numerous e-government services to citizens. 
The size and breadth of these centers make it 
possible to offer IT staff engaging career paths 
with the chance, for example, to improve a 
variety of online services while tackling the 
challenges of managing a large-scale data center. 
In the United Kingdom, the government 
actively seeks to attract talented individuals from 
the private sector by offering fast-track career 
opportunities for high performers. For example, 
the government CIO and the head of digital ser- 
vices spent most of their careers in the private 
sector. In addition, high-performing graduates 
are offered fast promotion opportunities in 
various government-service areas, including IT.

5.  Use big data and analytics to improve 
decision making. The US government has 
been one of the most active in leveraging data 
to support government decision making. In 
2009, it gave open data a legal and privacy 
framework that led to the creation of data.gov, a 
repository of government tools, resources, and 
information on anything from energy and 
science to global development and health. In 
all, more than 85,000 data sets are available to 
help businesses and private citizens conduct 
research, develop web and mobile apps, and 
create design visualizations. To populate data 
troves, government departments were required 
to identify and share their most valuable data. 

Competitions, such as Apps for America and 
Apps for Democracy, have been organized to 
attract talented developers to build applica-
tions that use government data. 

6.  Protect critical infrastructure and confi-
dential data. Data security has become a top 
national-security issue. In 2013, the World 
Economic Forum identified cyberattacks and 
critical-systems failure as two of the most 
dangerous global risks. Beyond financial losses, 
cyberattacks may pose serious reputation risks 
for companies and governments. 
 
Governments can protect critical infrastructure 
and confidential data through several in itia- 
 tives. For example, most major developed 
economies have created a national cybersecurity 
strategy in the past five years. They are also 
developing information-sharing mechanisms 
to detect and respond to cyberthreats more 
quickly. One example is the UK Fusion Cell, 
which brings experts from government and  
the private sector together in an infor mation-
sharing and threat-analysis hub.

. . .
Regardless of where a public-sector organization 
is in its digitization journey, these six lessons  
can help as it starts, scales, or evaluates its 
program. The stakes are high. When digital 
public-sector transformations succeed, citizens 
and businesses will benefit from better access,  
and governments can operate more nimbly and 
achieve substantial savings. •

The authors wish to thank Ümit Çakmak, Robert Carsouw, Sverre Fjeldstad, Johanna Hirscher, and Kate Jackson  

for their contributions to this article.

Cem Dilmegani is a consultant in McKinsey’s Istanbul office, where Bengi Korkmaz is a principal; Martin 

Lundqvist is a principal in the Stockholm office. Copyright © 2014 McKinsey & Company. All rights reserved.


