









































The Hamilton Project  •  Brookings  1

Seth D. Harris and Alan B. Krueger

DISCUSSION PAPER 2015-10  |  DECEMBER 2015

A Proposal for Modernizing Labor Laws for  
Twenty-First-Century Work: The “Independent Worker”



2  Informing Students about Their College Options: A Proposal for Broadening the Expanding College Opportunities Project

MISSION STATEMENT

ADVISORY COUNCIL

MISSION STATEMENT

The Hamilton Project seeks to advance America’s promise  

of opportunity, prosperity, and growth.

We believe that today’s increasingly competitive global economy 

demands public policy ideas commensurate with the challenges 

of the 21st Century. The Project’s economic strategy reflects a 

judgment that long-term prosperity is best achieved by fostering 

economic growth and broad participation in that growth, by 

enhancing individual economic security, and by embracing a role 

for effective government in making needed public investments.

 Our strategy calls for combining public investment, a secure social 

safety net, and fiscal discipline. In that framework, the Project 

puts forward innovative proposals from leading economic thinkers 

— based on credible evidence and experience, not ideology or 

doctrine — to introduce new and effective policy options into the 

national debate.

The Project is named after Alexander Hamilton, the nation’s 

first Treasury Secretary, who laid the foundation for the modern 

American economy. Hamilton stood for sound fiscal policy, 

believed that broad-based opportunity for advancement would 

drive American economic growth, and recognized that “prudent 

aids and encouragements on the part of government” are 

necessary to enhance and guide market forces. The guiding 

principles of the Project remain consistent with these views.



A Proposal for Modernizing Labor Laws  
for Twenty-First-Century Work: 

The “Independent Worker”

Seth D. Harris
Cornell University

Alan B. Krueger
Princeton University

DECEMBER 2015

NOTE: This discussion paper is a proposal from the authors. As emphasized in The Hamilton Project’s 
original strategy paper, the Project was designed in part to provide a forum for leading thinkers across the 
nation to put forward innovative and potentially important economic policy ideas that share the Project’s 
broad goals of promoting economic growth, broad-based participation in growth, and economic security. 
The authors are invited to express their own ideas in discussion papers, whether or not the Project’s staff or 
advisory council agrees with the specific proposals. This discussion paper is offered in that spirit. 

The Hamilton Project  •  Brookings 1



Abstract

New and emerging work relationships arising in the “online gig economy” do not fit easily into the existing legal definitions of 
“employee” and “independent contractor” status. The distinction is important because employees qualify for a range of legally 
mandated benefits and protections that are not available to independent contractors, such as the right to organize and bargain 
collectively, workers’ compensation insurance coverage, and overtime compensation. This paper proposes a new legal category, 
which we call “independent workers,” for those who occupy the gray area between employees and independent contractors. 

Independent workers typically work with intermediaries who match workers to customers. The independent worker and 
the intermediary have some elements of the arms-length independent business relationships that characterize “independent 
contractor” status, and some elements of a traditional employee-employer relationship. On the one hand, independent workers 
have the ability to choose when to work, and whether to work at all. They may work with multiple intermediaries simultaneously, 
or conduct personal tasks while they are working with an intermediary. It is thus impossible in many circumstances to attribute 
independent workers’ work hours to any employer. In this critical respect, independent workers are similar to independent 
businesses. On the other hand, the intermediary retains some control over the way independent workers perform their work, 
such as by setting their fees or fee caps, and they may “fire” workers by prohibiting them from using their service. In these 
respects, independent workers are similar to traditional employees. 

Evidence is presented suggesting that about 600,000 workers, or 0.4 percent of total U.S. employment, work with an online 
intermediary in the gig economy. Although there are probably many more workers who currently work with an offline intermediary 
who would qualify for independent worker status than there are who work with an online intermediary, the number of workers 
participating in the online gig economy is growing very rapidly. 

In our proposal, independent workers — regardless of whether they work through an online or offline intermediary — would 
qualify for many, although not all, of the benefits and protections that employees receive, including the freedom to organize 
and collectively bargain, civil rights protections, tax withholding, and employer contributions for payroll taxes. Because it is 
conceptually impossible to attribute their work hours to any single intermediary, however, independent workers would not 
qualify for hours-based benefits, including overtime or minimum wage requirements. Further, because independent workers 
would rarely, if ever, qualify for unemployment insurance benefits given the discretion they have to choose whether to work 
through an intermediary, they would not be covered by the program or be required to contribute taxes to fund that program. 
However, intermediaries would be permitted to pool independent workers for purposes of purchasing and providing insurance 
and other benefits at lower cost and higher quality without the risk that their relationship will be transformed into an employment 
relationship. 

Our proposal seeks to structure benefits to make independent worker status neutral when compared with employee status, as well 
as to enhance the efficiency of the operation of the labor market. By extending many of the legal benefits and protections found in 
employment relationships to independent workers, our proposal would protect and extend the social compact between workers 
and employers, and reduce the legal uncertainty and legal costs that currently beset many independent worker relationships.

2  A Proposal for Modernizing Labor Laws for Twenty-First-Century Work: The “Independent Worker”



Table of Contents

ABSTRACT  2

CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION 5

CHAPTER 2. CHALLENGES AND BACKGROUND 6

CHAPTER 3. PRINCIPLES OF A NEW WORKER CLASSIFICATION 13

CHAPTER 4. LEGAL REFORM FOR “INDEPENDENT WORKERS” 15

CHAPTER 5.  ARE INDEPENDENT WORKERS DIFFERENT FROM OTHER  

THIRD-PARTY PLAYERS IN LABOR MARKETS? 22

CHAPTER 6. ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF THE PROPOSAL 27

CHAPTER 7. CONCLUSION 33

CHAPTER 8. APPENDIX 28

AUTHORS, ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND DISCLAIMER 34

ENDNOTES  35

REFERENCES  36

The Hamilton Project  •  Brookings 3



4  A Proposal for Modernizing Labor Laws for Twenty-First-Century Work: The “Independent Worker”



New and emerging work relationships arising in the “online gig economy” do not fit the existing legal definitions of “employee” and “independent 
contractor” status. These definitions determine which workers 
are required to receive certain protections and benefits from 
their employers. Under the current legal framework, the 
workers and intermediaries with whom they work in these 
emerging relationships face unnecessary and excessive 
uncertainty regarding a range of legal protections and benefits 
that employees receive. Legal uncertainty creates inefficiencies 
for all parties concerned. In addition, work-related benefits 
that could prove valuable to both workers and businesses—
such as intermediaries using their size and pooling advantages 
to purchase low-cost life insurance for the independent 
workers they engage—are sometimes eschewed to reduce the 
risk that the law will impose an employment relationship and 
the corresponding legal obligations because of the provision of 
these benefits. As a result, the emergence of new forms of work 
that could benefit workers, businesses, and consumers could 
be slowed, or even stopped, by a legal regime for classifying 
workers that does not accommodate these innovative 
arrangements. A further concern with the current legal 
framework is that companies working online and offline to 
match workers to final customers could organize work in such 
a way as to classify jobs that were traditionally performed by 
employees into independent contractor relationships to avoid 
providing employees with benefits that are a crucial part of the 
social compact.

To address these problems, we propose a new legal category of 
workers, which we call “independent workers,” who occupy a 
middle ground between traditional employees and independent 
contractors. An archetypal example of independent workers 
is for-hire drivers who work on the Lyft or Uber platforms. 
We refer to these companies, and others like them, as 
“intermediaries” because they are the intermediary between 
the independent worker and the ultimate customer. These 
independent worker arrangements bear some similarities to 

independent contractors and some similarities to traditional 
employees. On the one hand, the drivers can choose when and 
whether to work, similar to independent contractors, but on 
the other hand, drivers face restrictions that are imposed by 
the intermediary on how much they charge customers. Other 
online intermediaries that utilize a similar model include 
TaskRabbit (for a variety of tasks) and Mechanical Turk (for 
tasks completed online).

Technology is creating exciting new opportunities to link 
workers who provide services directly to customers, with 
potentially large gains in the quality, speed, and efficiency of 
service. From an economic and societal perspective, however, 
it is important that, if these new intermediaries are to succeed 
and expand, it is a result of their superior technology, efficiency, 
or service, not because their technology or business model 
enables regulatory arbitrage. For example, if an intermediary 
succeeds by displacing traditional employers who offer the 
same service because the intermediary gains a cost advantage 
by avoiding provision of certain legally mandated benefits and 
protections, then welfare is reduced by the innovation.

Below, we propose that Congress and, where appropriate, 
state legislatures, enact legislation to define and establish a 
third legal category of workers: independent workers. This 
legislation would clearly define the protections and benefits 
that intermediaries would be required to provide to the workers 
with whom they conduct business. These protections and 
benefits would approximate the social compact guaranteed to 
employees, albeit with important differences that reflect the 
substantive distinctions between employment relationships 
and independent worker–intermediary relationships. In 
crafting this legislation, Congress should abide by a set of 
governing principles to identify these workers; we describe 
those principles below. We also provide an analysis of the 
size, growth, and business models used by an emerging set of 
online intermediaries.

Chapter 1. Introduction

The Hamilton Project  •  Brookings 5



It is our view that labor and employment law has evolved over time in the United States to reflect a social compact between employees and employers. This social compact 
represents a synthesis between the desire to enhance the 
efficiency of the operation of the labor market (e.g., to overcome 
information asymmetries and imperfections) and to ensure 
that the employment relationship treats workers fairly in light 
of the unequal bargaining power that typifies most employee–
employer relationships. This social compact has served the 
United States well and, in our view, should be preserved and 
protected unless there are compelling reasons to alter it.

But workers participating in the growing online “gig economy” 
are at risk of being excluded from this social compact. These 
are the workers who use an Internet-based app created by an 
intermediary that matches customers to workers who will 
perform personal services. Independent workers do not fit into 
either of the two legal statuses currently available under U.S. 
labor, employment, and tax law: employees or independent 
contractors. As noted, such workers have some similarities to 
independent contractors and some similarities to traditional 
employees. We offer a fuller discussion of these similarities 
and differences below. The resulting ambiguity in these 
workers’ legal status leads to uncertainty and inefficiency in 
the labor market that are harmful to both the workers and the 
intermediaries in several ways.

First, determining whether workers in the online gig economy 
are employees or independent contractors will require, and 
can be expected to continue to require, long, costly and 
uncertain legal battles.1 Some Western economies (e.g., Czech 
Republic, Estonia, France [in selected circumstances], Mexico, 
The Netherlands, Portugal) have statutory presumptions that 
essentially establish “employee” status as a default condition 
(OECD 2014). Absent a rebuttal of the presumption, there 
is no uncertainty regarding a worker’s status. There is no 
default status in U.S. law, however. The resulting uncertainty 
is costly to workers, who do not know the benefits that 
they will ultimately qualify for, and to intermediaries, who 
face uncertain costs. Both parties face the prospect of high 
transaction costs resulting from litigation or government 
enforcement interventions.

Second, current labor and employment laws are not 
harmonized or applied consistently. Workers and employers 
must confront different tests across statutes for employee 
status and independent contractor status. These tests and 
courts’ interpretations vary across statutes because the core 
purposes of those statutes vary (e.g., tax law serves a different 
purpose from occupational safety and health law). So, a 
statute’s scope of coverage should be expected to best serve 
that law’s purpose. Nonetheless, the classification of workers 
as employees or independent contractors requires analysis of 
several different tests that, at least theoretically, could lead 
to different results. For example, a worker might be deemed 
entitled to the minimum wage, but not to have her employer 
pay half of her payroll taxes.

An even greater risk comes from the fact that these tests 
are collections of factors for consideration rather than clear 
thresholds or required elements. Labels applied in contracts 
are irrelevant. Courts and administrative agencies often warn 
that no single factor governs, and the weighing of factors is 
often left to individual decision makers. As a practical matter, 
in too many cases conclusions are driven by a predetermined 
desired outcome rather than by objective analysis. As a result, 
similarly situated workers, such as truck drivers, could be 
employees under a statute in one jurisdiction, but independent 
contractors under the same statute in a different jurisdiction.2  

Because they occupy a middle ground between employees 
and independent contractors, independent workers and the 
intermediaries with which they work are especially vexed by 
this ambiguous system. As noted above, independent workers 
satisfy different factors of both the employee and independent 
contractor tests under most labor, tax, and employment 
laws. Will courts and administrative agencies classify them 
consistently across laws and jurisdictions? Can independent 
workers and intermediaries predict how they will be treated 
when the legal dust settles? This risk and uncertainty creates a 
barrier to the continuation and creation of relationships that 
can be beneficial to all parties involved.

Third, many independent workers who are classified as 
independent contractors may not have the means to secure 
many of the protections and benefits that are available to 
traditional employees. Independent workers also face barriers 

Chapter 2. Challenges and Background

6  A Proposal for Modernizing Labor Laws for Twenty-First-Century Work: The “Independent Worker”



to “pooling” that would increase their bargaining power 
both in dealings with their intermediaries and in markets 
for fringe benefits that could provide them with many of the 
same benefits and protections that are legally mandated for 
employees.

Finally, some employers may reorganize their work to classify 
employees as independent contractors to avoid providing 
required benefits and protections under the social compact and 
to gain an unfair advantage over their competitors. Equally 
troubling, the uncertainty in this dichotomous classification 
system facilitates both intentional and unintentional 
misclassification of workers by employers, usually in the 
direction of independent contractor status that deprives 
workers of many important legal protections and benefits.

THE “EMPLOYEE” VS. “INDEPENDENT 
CONTRACTOR” DICHOTOMY

The difference between the status of employees and independent 
contractors is more than an issue of nomenclature. A sizable list 
of protections and benefits are at stake, depending on how the 
relationship is classified. It is worth reviewing what is at stake.

Employees benefit from contracts with their employers 
that include significant substantive terms that are imposed 
by law. In essence, employees agree to be economically 
dependent on their employers by relinquishing control over 
many aspects of their work lives (and, to some extent, their 
economic futures) and, in return, employers must provide 
workers with a degree of economic security. Myriad laws at 
the federal and state level require employers to pay employees 
at least the minimum wage and overtime premium pay; 
refrain from discriminating in hiring, firing, and the terms 
and conditions of employment on the basis of race, sex, and 
other selected personal characteristics; maintain safe and 
healthy workplaces; contribute toward the payroll taxes that 
make employees eligible for unemployment insurance, Social 
Security, Disability Insurance, and Medicare; and provide 
workers’ compensation insurance, among other protections. 
Under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA), 
many employers also will be required to provide employees 
with health insurance or pay a penalty if they do not. Finally, 
the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) 
requires covered employers to satisfy certain requirements if 
they provide employees with a retirement savings plan. 

Various laws apply tests to identify employees and their 
employers who are covered by some or all of this social compact. 
Key features of the determination of employee status include 
the likelihood that the employment relationships will continue 
indefinitely, or at least beyond the completion of a given task, 
even if only for a specified term, and whether the employer gives 
the worker instructions about how to do the work. Employees are 
also expected to have little control over their work hours, unless 

their employers delegate such control to them. Table 1 provides 
a summary of how the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA), 
Internal Revenue Code (IRC), common law, and selected other 
employment laws determine employee status. These tests are 
an imperfect and increasingly outdated means for determining 
eligibility for coverage under the social compact.

Independent contractors, in contrast to employees, do 
not relinquish control over their economic lives to others. 
Generally speaking, they are independent businesses working 
with multiple other businesses or clients without significant 
limitations, except those to which they may agree by contract 
or laws that may pertain to businesses in their sector. Typically, 
these relationships are not expected to last beyond the 
completion of a particular task, activity, or deadline. In the past, 
independent contractors have operated more at the periphery 
of others’ businesses rather than performing more-integral 
work, but the fissuring of work and business relationships and 
the increasingly complex supply chains that have developed 
over the past several decades in some industries have made this 
consideration less important (Weil 2014).

Independent contractors control the methods and means of 
the work they perform for others, make significant capital 
investments, possibly employ others, and retain the opportunity 
for profit or loss. For these reasons, independent contractors are 
expected to have some bargaining power—even if it is not equal 
bargaining power—that allows them to enter into successful 
arms-length contracts with other businesses and clients.

Existing law wrongly implies that employees and independent 
contractors occupy the entire field of work relationships in the 
U.S. economy. This dichotomy is a vestige of the early law of 
“masters” and “servants” that is as archaic as the words suggest. 
Newly emerging “independent workers” participate in new 
kinds of work relationships that occupy a space between these 
two statuses.

Other countries have not clung to a dichotomous employee–
independent contractor categorization of work relationships. 
Both Canada and Germany, for example, recognize a 
“dependent contractor” status for some independent 
contractors. This status becomes relevant when a contractor 
has formed an essentially exclusive relationship (80% being 
a “rule of thumb” for “exclusive” in Canada) over a lengthy 
period of time with one client such that the contractor 
is economically dependent on the continuation of that 
relationship. In some Canadian provinces these dependent 
contractors are treated like employees, at least with respect to 
termination notifications and eligibility for union membership 
(Kennedy 2014). While dependent contractor status illustrates 
that there is room for more than two legal statuses in the world 
of work, it is worth noting that the dependent contractor 
concept does not accurately correspond to the relationship 
between intermediaries and independent workers because 

The Hamilton Project  •  Brookings 7



independent workers typically have only fleeting relationships 
with their final customers. For this reason, we see no evidence 
that Canada, for example, has sought to apply the status to its 
intermediaries and independent workers.

THE GRAY AREA

The heart of the challenge for independent workers is that they 
do not resemble independent contractors or employees with 
respect to their most fundamental characteristics. Independent 
workers typically have little individual bargaining power and, 
as a result, do not have the ability to negotiate contracts with 
either intermediaries or their ultimate customers that could 
secure for them the protections and benefits that are available 
to employees. They are not true independent businesspeople in 
that they do not have freedom to negotiate their compensation 

or terms of service. But their relationships with intermediaries 
are not so dependent, deep, extensive, or long lasting that we 
should ask these intermediaries to assume responsibility for all 
aspects of independent workers’ economic security. They are 
not true employees. Thus, the existing employee–independent 
contractor dichotomy does not offer a satisfying or reliable 
path in these new and emerging circumstances.

Forcing these new forms of work into a traditional employment 
relationship could be an existential threat to the emergence 
of online-intermediated work, with adverse consequences 
for workers, consumers, businesses, and the economy. At the 
same time, relying on the existing employee–independent 
contractor dichotomy to classify workers whose circumstances 
do not easily fit either definition risks depriving those workers 
of any benefits or protections of the social compact, and risks 

TABLE 1. 

Definitions of “Employee” Under Selected Statutes  

Role of 
work: 

Is the work 
performed 
integral to the 
employer’s 
business?

Skills 
Involved: 

Is the 
work not 
necessarily 
dependent on 
special skills?

Investment:

Does the 
employer 
provide the 
necessary 
tools and/or 
equipment 
and bear the 
risk of loss 
from those 
investments?

Independent 
Business 
Judgment:  
Has the 
worker 
withdrawn 
from the 
competitive 
market to 
work for the 
employer?

Duration: 

Does the 
worker have 
a permanent 
or indefinite 
relationship 
with the 
employer? 

Control:

Does the 
employer set 
pay amount, 
work hours, 
and manner in 
which work is 
performed?

Benefits:

Does the 
worker 
receive 
insurance, 
pension plan, 
sick days, 
or other 
benefits that 
suggest an 
employment 
relationship?

Method of 
Payment:

Does the 
worker 
receive a 
guaranteed 
wage or 
salary as 
opposed to a 
fee per task?

Intent:

Do the parties 
believe they 
have created 
a employer–
employee 
relationship?

Fair Labor 
Standards 
Act

(Centered 
on degree 
of economic 
dependence 
on employer)

YES YES YES YES YES YES N/A N/A N/A

Internal 
Revenue 
Code (IRC)

(Centered 
on control)

YES1 YES YES2 YES3 YES YES YES YES N/A

Nationwide 
Mut. Ins. v. 
Darden

(ERISA and 
other laws)4 

YES YES YES N/A YES YES YES YES N/A

Common Law

(From 
Restatement  
Second of 
Agency § 220)

YES YES YES YES YES YES N/A YES YES

Note: “Yes” contributes to a conclusion that the worker is an “employee”; “N/A” indicates the factor is not considered under the specified law.

1The IRS looks at the role of the work as an indicator of control – if the work is “key” to employer’s business, the employer will likely have the right to direct or to control the work)
2The IRS also specifically looks at whether the worker has a high degree of unreimbursed expenses.
3The IRC does not use “business judgment” as a term, but does ask if the worker’s services are available to the market directly. 
4The Supreme Court draws its multi-factor test from Nationwide Mutual Ins. Co. v. Darden, 503 U.S. 318 (1992). 

8  A Proposal for Modernizing Labor Laws for Twenty-First-Century Work: The “Independent Worker”



the erosion of the social compact for employees. If the dual 
goals of labor and employment law are increased efficiency 
and protection of workers from the consequences of unequal 
bargaining power, then the status quo serves neither goal in 
the case of independent workers.

INDEPENDENT WORKERS

Independent workers operate in a triangular relationship: 
they provide services to customers identified with the help of 
intermediaries. The intermediaries create a communications 
channel, typically an “app,” that customers use to identify 
themselves as needing a service—for example, a car ride, 
landscaping services, or food delivery. (An intermediary need 
not utilize the Internet to match independent workers and 
customers, but we initially focus on online intermediaries 
because they have the greatest potential to disrupt working 
relationships.) The intermediaries’ apps allow independent 
workers to select which customers they would like to serve. The 
intermediary does not assign the customer to the independent 
worker; rather, the independent worker chooses or declines 
to serve the customer (sometimes within broadly defined 
limits). However, the intermediary may set certain threshold 
requirements for independent workers who are eligible to use 
its app, such as criminal background checks. The intermediary 
may also set the price (or at least an upper bound on the price) 

for the service provided by independent workers through its 
app. But the intermediary exercises no further control over 
how and whether a particular independent worker will serve 
a particular customer. The intermediary is typically rewarded 
for its services with a predetermined percentage of the fee paid 
by the customer to the independent worker.

The best known of these kinds of triangular relationships are 
drivers providing ride-sharing services to customers brokered 
through online apps provided by Uber and Lyft. Somewhat 
less famous are the independent workers doing odd jobs like 
landscaping, maid service, home repairs, and other tasks for 
customers using similar apps provided by intermediaries such 
as Taskrabbit and Thumbtack. There are several especially 
important aspects of these triangular relationships. First, the 
independent worker provides personal services only when 
she chooses to do so. The intermediary plays no role in this 
decision. This is qualitatively different from an employment 
relationship, even one in which a worker may be allowed to 
work from home or to choose flexible working hours. The 
independent worker chooses when and whether to work at all. 
The relationship can be fleeting, occasional, or constant, at the 
discretion of the independent worker.

BOX 1.

An Example

A simple hypothetical example illustrates a representative challenge posed by the existing employee–independent contractor 
dichotomy. Imagine an independent worker driving around her city in her car. She has apps for Uber and Lyft open on 
separate electronic devices. She is waiting for a customer who is seeking a ride from the area in which she is driving to 
another part of the city. Two questions arise: (1) Should the driver be compensated for this waiting time? And, if so, (2) who 
should compensate her?

Under existing FLSA doctrine, and assuming the driver is an employee, whether the driver’s waiting time constitutes 
compensable work hours turns on the question of whether the driver is “waiting to be engaged” or “engaged to wait.” This 
distinction, in turn, depends on whether the driver can use the waiting time for her own personal purposes. If she can, 
she is waiting to be engaged and does not qualify to be paid for the waiting time. If the employer controls the employee’s 
movement during the waiting time, or there is too little time available for personal activity, the employee is engaged to wait 
and entitled to compensation.

In this context, it seems the better argument is that the driver is waiting to be engaged. She can turn off the apps at will and 
go to her traditional job, undertake another moneymaking activity, drive her children to school, or park by the side of the 
road and take a nap. Even if she does not turn off either app, she is not obligated to pick up any particular customer. She can 
wait for a customer of her choosing, or until after she has completed her personal activities, whatever they might be.

Let’s assume for purposes of reaching the second question, however, that this legal conclusion is incorrect and that the driver 
is deemed to be engaged to wait. She has two apps open: one for Uber and one for Lyft. Who should pay the driver for this 
waiting time? Both Uber and Lyft? Whichever intermediary offers the ride that the driver ultimately accepts? Whichever 
intermediary offers the most rides to this driver during that day? We should not pretend that existing FLSA doctrine 
answers this question since there is no analogy in the employee–employer relationship to a driver with two simultaneously 
open apps for different services. This situation is not joint employment. If anything, Uber and Lyft are competitors for the 
driver’s services, not co-employers. The best legal answer seems to be that there is not a good answer.

The Hamilton Project  •  Brookings 9



The independent worker may offer her services through multiple 
intermediaries, or combine working with intermediaries and 
employment with a traditional employer. Like traditional 
employees, independent workers are integral to the business 
of the intermediary. The intermediary’s business lives or dies 
by the provision of services by independent workers. Lyft 
would not exist if no drivers were willing to provide car ride 
services through the Lyft platform.  

These relationships do not fit neatly into the employee–
independent contractor dichotomy. Independent workers are 
not employees for the following reasons: they do not make 

themselves economically dependent on any single employer, 
they do not have an indefinite relationship with any employer, 
and they do not relinquish control over their work hours or 
the opportunity for profit or loss. Independent workers are not 
independent contractors because some aspects of the methods 
and means of work—including the price of their services—are 
controlled by the intermediary and because they are integral to 
the business of the intermediary. Independent workers are, in 
some respects, like individuals working for others, and in other 
respects are like independent businesses (e.g., they use their own 
equipment and control their own hours). Hence we propose a 
new legal and economic category of independent workers.

BOX 2. 

The Scope and Growth of the Online Gig Economy

There has been much speculation about the size and growth rate of the gig economy. We are particularly interested 
in the number of workers participating in the “online gig economy,” because this sector is growing rapidly and often 
involves workers that fall in the gray area between employees and independent contractors. As we are defining it, the 
online gig economy involves the use of an Internet-based app to match customers to workers who perform discrete 
personal tasks, such as driving a passenger from point A to point B, or delivering a meal to a customer’s house. Note 
that this definition excludes intermediaries that facilitate the sale of goods and impersonal services to customers, such 
as TeacherPayTeachers.com, a Web site where teachers sell lesson plans and other nonpersonal services to other teachers, 
and Etsy.com, a Web site where individuals sell handmade or vintage goods. It also excludes Airbnb, a Web site where 
people can rent apartments, houses, and other accommodations.

Uber (left scale) ChaCha Fiverr GrubHub Handy

Mechanical Turk/
Amazon Turk

Sidecar TaskRabbit Thumbtack Upwork/
Elance/oDesk

Lyft

Other

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

Index (Relative to U
ber)

In
de

x 
(U

be
r)

Jan. 2004 Jan. 2006 Jan. 2008 Jan. 2010 Jan. 2012 Jan. 2014 Jan. 2016

FIGURE 1.

Google Trends: Four-Week Moving Average of Web Searches

Source: Google Trends analysis by authors.

Notes: “Other” includes agentanything, axiom law, clickworker, Eden McCallum, Gengo, Gocurb/TaxiMagic, hourly nerd, Instacart, medicast, Red Beacon, 
Samasource, Shyp, Skillshare, trycaviar/caviar delivery, and Washio. Search period spans January 1, 2015- November 7, 2015. Google Trends normalizes the data for 
each term specified relative to the total number of Google searches conducted in that week, so that the time period with the most searches for Uber equals 100. 

10  A Proposal for Modernizing Labor Laws for Twenty-First-Century Work: The “Independent Worker”



The Appendix table lists 26 prominent companies that act as intermediaries in the online gig economy, the types of 
services that they supply, and the nature of their business arrangements with workers. This list is meant to illustrate 
examples of emerging opportunities in the gig economy, and not to necessarily classify their workers. We are not 
advocating that every worker engaged with every intermediary in the online gig economy should be classified as an 
independent worker. It is quite common that these businesses compensate workers who utilize their app on a commission 
basis, with commissions taken by the intermediary typically in the 10 to 20 percent range, though commissions are 
sometimes higher. Some of the intermediaries control the fee that workers can charge end customers for their services, 
while others allow workers to propose a fee. Determining whether the workers who participate in these online markets 
are independent workers would require a deeper analysis of their relationship with their intermediary.

Unfortunately, because almost all of these companies are privately held start-ups, little public information is available 
regarding their size, growth rate, revenues, or profitability. Nevertheless, we can obtain a rough estimate of their size and 
growth rate from Google Trends (www.google.com/trends/). Google Trends enables users to track the relative frequency 
of searches for various terms. Specifically, we used Google Trends to compute the relative number of searches conducted 
in the United States containing the names of each intermediary listed in the Appendix table; we then normalized the data 
relative to searches for the term “Uber” each week. “Uber” is by far the most frequent term that arises in searches for the 
intermediaries in the table.

Figure 1 summarizes the data, and shows a four-week moving average of the relative frequency of searches for each 
intermediary. The exponential growth rate of Uber searches since 2013 matches the exponential growth rate of Uber 
driver-partners reported in Hall and Krueger (2015). In addition to Uber, intermediaries Lyft and Grubhub also exhibit 
an exponential growth path. Searches for ChaCha, a search engine guided by humans, grew rapidly until 2012 and then 
trailed off as the company encountered difficulties.

Figure 2 provides a bar chart on the relative number of searches for each intermediary, and combines the data for 
every week from January through early November 2015. The searches are indexed relative to searches for Uber. The 
second-most-common intermediary that Internet users searched for was Grubhub. Searches for Grubhub were about 
one-fifth as common as searches for Uber. (Note that Uber is shown on the scale on the left vertical axis, and all of the 

0

20

40

60

80

100

10

30

50

70

90

In
de

x 
(R

el
at

iv
e 

to
 U

be
r)

Ub
er

Gru
bH

ub Lyf
t

Up
wo

rk
Five

rr

Thu
mb

tac
k

Me
cha

nic
al T

urk

Tas
kRa

bbi
t

Sid
eca

r
Han

dy
Cha

Cha Oth
er

18.5
12.4

100

3.5 3.2 3.1 2.9 1.7 1.4 1.1 0.7 0

FIGURE 2.

Google Trends: Cumulative Web Searches in 2015

Source: Google Trends analysis by authors.

Notes: “Other” includes Agent Anything, Axiom, Caviar, Clickworker, Curb, Eden McCallum, Gengo, Hourly Nerd, Instacart, Medicast, Red Beacon, Samasource, 
Shyp, Skillshare, and Washio. Search period spans January 1, 2015- November 7, 2015. Google Trends normalizes the data for each term specified relative to the 
total number of Google searches conducted in that week, so that the period with the most searches for Uber equals 100.

The Hamilton Project  •  Brookings 11



others are shown on the scale on the right vertical axis.) Searches for Lyft, Uber’s largest online competitor, were only 
12 percent as frequent as were searches for Uber. The skewness of the distribution of searches for online intermediaries 
is noteworthy. Only seven other intermediaries registered more than one percent as much search interest as Uber. The 
other 25 intermediaries combined generated only about half (48.5 percent) as much search activity as did Uber. 

We can derive a rough estimate of the size of the online gig economy as follows. First, note that in December 2014 Uber 
had 162,000 active drivers in the United States, and the number of drivers more than doubled every six months from 
2012 to 2014 (Hall and Krueger 2015). Assuming this pace continued into 2015, Uber had around 400,000 active driver-
partners in the fall of 2015. If the number of workers providing services through an intermediary is proportional to the 
number of Google searches—an assumption that is quite plausible for Lyft and less clear for other intermediaries—then 
there would only be about 600,000 workers, or 0.4 percent of total employment in the United States, engaged with all of 
the intermediaries in the Appendix table. If, however, Google searches translate into five to ten times as many workers 
per search incident for apps other than Uber and Lyft—to make an extreme assumption—then there would be about 1.2 
to 1.9 million workers engaged in the online gig economy. This figure is in the ballpark of McKinsey’s estimate that 1 
percent of the U.S. working-age population participates in “contingent work that is transacted on a digital marketplace” 
(McKinsey Global Institute 2015). There are probably many more workers who work for traditional intermediaries (i.e., 
that do not use apps to match workers with customers) who would be classified as independent workers than there are 
workers who work for emerging intermediaries (i.e., that use Internet-based apps) who would be classified as independent 
workers.

Although precise estimates of the number of workers engaged in the gig economy are not available and must await 
further research, these calculations suggest that independent workers operating in online markets make up a very small 
share of total U.S. employment at present. However, it is clear that some intermediaries are growing rapidly, and creating 
a rapidly expanding new segment of the workforce.

12  A Proposal for Modernizing Labor Laws for Twenty-First-Century Work: The “Independent Worker”



To identify independent workers and guide the determination of the benefits and protections for which they should qualify, we offer three main principles: 
immeasurability of work hours, neutrality, and efficiency.

IMMEASURABILITY OF WORK HOURS

The boundary between work and nonwork for independent 
workers is largely indeterminable. A worker in the online gig 
economy could be primarily engaged in personal tasks while 
one or more intermediaries’ apps are turned on. It would 
stretch any reasonable definition of “work” to count this time 
as work hours, as the example in box 1 illustrates. This fact 
of the online gig economy creates an immediate problem for 
implementing the social compact. Many benefits included 
in that compact, such as the minimum 
wage, overtime pay, and ACA eligibility, 
are tied to hours worked—and, even more 
specifically, hours worked for a particular 
employer. Determining whether and 
for whom an independent worker is 
“working” is impossible or deeply 
problematic in too many circumstances 
for the concept of work hours to translate 
into these emerging relationships.

There are circumstances in which 
independent workers are undeniably 
working. For example, a landscaper is 
working during the time she is mowing 
a customer’s lawn or trimming hedges. A 
driver is working while he has a customer 
in his car and the car is under way to the customer’s destination. 
It is equally undeniable that technological developments have 
made recording this time even easier than using a clock or 
watch. Yet these independent workers are working for the 
customer during these times, and not the intermediary. Once 
the connection between customer and independent worker 
has been made, the intermediary has no role except to collect 
payment and transmit it to the independent worker. Even 
under the broadest definition of “employ” in the law, which is 
found in the FLSA, the intermediary cannot be said to “suffer 
or permit” this work.

If a worker works for two intermediaries at the same time, 
as illustrated by the example of a driver who uses apps 
for Lyft and Uber simultaneously, it is unclear how the law 
would or should apportion total work hours between the two 
companies. Moreover, a worker could spend time at home with 
her app turned on, waiting for a possible work opportunity, 
while primarily performing work for another intermediary or 
engaging in nonwork activities. Conceptually, workers’ hours 
spent waiting to be engaged in work cannot be apportioned 
to a specific employer. In this sense, independent workers are 
working for themselves and working on their own time.

If work hours cannot be apportioned and measured for the 
purposes of assigning benefits or assessing hourly earnings, 
we think it makes little sense to require intermediaries to 

provide hours-based benefits, such as overtime and the 
minimum wage. Although employees have a hard-earned 
right to these protections, independent workers can be viewed 
as having traded these protections for the flexibility that their 
work arrangement affords.

NEUTRALITY

Creative destruction works to raise living standards when new 
entrants gain an advantage because they provide better goods 
or services, or the same goods or services more efficiently. 
However, when start-ups gain advantage because they skirt 
certain worker or customer protections, and not because they 

Chapter 3. Principles of a New Worker Classification

The Hamilton Project  •  Brookings 13

Creative destruction works to raise living 
standards when new entrants gain an 

advantage because they provide  
better goods or services, or the same  

goods or services more efficiently.



have developed a better product or better way of producing 
it, creative destruction is destructive to living standards. 
It is therefore important that businesses do not organize 
themselves to move workers into independent worker status 
in order to gain an unfair advantage over other employers by 
skirting legal protections and required benefits. From society’s 
perspective, it is important that businesses not choose to 
structure their work relationships to meet the definitions of 
independent workers or independent contractors in order to 
free ride on other employers with respect to providing certain 
benefits, such as health insurance.

Neutrality also requires that workers in “old economy” jobs 
who meet the definition of independent worker, as opposed 
to independent contractor or employee, should be classified as 
“independent workers.” For example, as argued in the analysis 
below, many taxi drivers who are currently classified as 
independent contractors could be deemed to be independent 
workers, depending on their terms and conditions of work. In 
this way, taxi drivers would be treated just like independent 
workers who provide rides through the Uber and Lyft 
platforms.

EFFICIENCY

The independent worker contract should be efficient in the 
sense that it enables workers and intermediaries to maximize 
the joint surplus that their relationship produces. For 
example, independent contractor status is currently inefficient 
for many intermediaries and their contract workers because 
the intermediary avoids providing benefits that would make 
both the worker and the intermediary better off to reduce 
the chances of the relationship being ruled an employment 
relationship. We believe that legal uncertainty, and the 
intentional and unintentional misclassification it facilitates, 
are significant contributors to this inefficiency.

These principles are of first-order importance in guiding 
the reform of labor, employment, and other laws concerning 
independent workers, although we acknowledge that progress 
in meeting one of the principles can conflict with progress 
in meeting another. For example, crafting rules to ensure 
neutrality could create uncertainty that, at least in the short 
run, could reduce efficiency. Nevertheless, explicitly specifying 
the key objectives and recognizing the trade-offs involved is a 
first step toward devising a more rational system.

14  A Proposal for Modernizing Labor Laws for Twenty-First-Century Work: The “Independent Worker”



In view of these principles, we propose that Congress, and state legislatures where applicable, enact legislation that would guarantee or permit the following benefits and 
protections for independent workers to ensure they can benefit 
from America’s social compact. It is worth noting that federal 
law problems can be solved with a single act of Congress that 
amends the applicable tax, labor, and employment laws, as 
well as antitrust statutes, as appropriate. We acknowledge that 
proposed legislation addressing multiple subjects often faces 
the difficult challenge of working its way through multiple 
committees with different jurisdictions in each house of 
Congress. Nonetheless, the only way to ensure inclusion of 
all of the protections and benefits we consider important to 
independent worker status is a single omnibus bill. State law 
changes may also be required to address workers’ compensation 
and unemployment insurance issues. States with their own 
antitrust and workplace laws may need to amend those statutes 
to reconcile them with Congress’s amendments to federal law, 
if federal law changes do not override state laws. 

While an argument might be made that courts or administrative 
agencies could use their existing authority to address a few of the 
problems created by the emergence of independent workers, the 
evolution of an entirely new third legal classification for workers 
should not be left to judges or regulators. Our principal concern 
is not the typical process argument around the propriety of 
unelected judges and regulatory officials making certain policy 
decisions rather than the democratically elected branches of 
government. Rather, our objection is that courts do not have the 
power, on their own, to ensure that independent workers receive 
their full and fair share of the social compact—that is, the full 
complement of protections and benefits that must be established 
by statute. Moreover, courts do not have sufficient authority 
to ensure a fully efficient solution to the problems created by 
the emergence of independent workers. Similarly, regulatory 
agencies like the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and the U.S. 
Department of Labor do not have the authority to provide all of 
these benefits or an efficient outcome. A comprehensive solution 
will necessarily require Congress taking action followed, where 
necessary, by state legislatures.

We propose the following reforms.

FREEDOM TO ORGANIZE AND COLLECTIVELY 
BARGAIN

Antitrust laws should be amended to allow independent 
workers to organize for the purpose of aggregating their 
individual bargaining power so they may bargain successfully 
with their intermediaries over the terms and conditions of 
their work. Collective action could address imbalances in 
bargaining power between individual independent workers 
and intermediaries and thereby give independent workers 
some ability to influence their compensation and benefits 
while providing them an opportunity to gain a voice in their 
relationships with intermediaries. The ability to organize 
would also make independent worker status more neutral 
with respect to employee status.

Collective action by employees is protected by the National 
Labor Relations Act (NLRA). In principle, the NLRA 
safeguards employees’ “right to self-organization, to form, join, 
or assist labor organizations, to bargain collectively through 
representatives of their own choosing, and to engage in other 
concerted activities for the purpose of collective bargaining 
or other mutual aid or protection, and shall also have the 
right to refrain from any or all of such activities” (29 U.S.C. 
§ 157). The NLRA seeks to enforce these rights by deeming 
certain employer and union behaviors that infringe them to 
be “unfair labor practices” that may be remedied by order of 
the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) (29 U.S.C. § 158). 

The NLRB is the administrative agency created by the NLRA 
to which Congress delegated responsibility over private sector-
labor relations. In addition to prosecuting and adjudicating 
unfair labor practices, the NLRB administers elections 
that determine whether a majority of an identified group of 
employees wants to be represented by a union. If a union wins 
a representation election, or secures voluntary recognition 
from an employer with majority support within a group of 
employees, then the union is the exclusive representative of all 
employees in that “bargaining unit” (29 U.S.C. § 153(b)).

Because they are not employees, in our proposal independent 
workers would not be covered by the NLRA and, therefore, 
would not have access to the NLRB and its processes, or to any 
of the NLRA’s remedies (29 U.S.C. § 152(3)). In some regards, 
this may be beneficial for independent workers’ organizing 

Chapter 4. Legal Reform for “Independent Workers”

The Hamilton Project  •  Brookings 15



prospects. The NLRA has been long derided as ossified, 
ineffective, and lacking in effective remedies for violations 
of employees’ rights to organize and bargain collectively 
(Estlund 2002; Weiler 2009). Many unions have migrated away 
from organizing workers through NLRB elections to private 
“neutrality and card check” agreements with employers that 
operate outside the scope of the NLRB (Brudney 2005). In part 
because the NLRA does not effectively safeguard workers’ 
freedom to choose a union, the private sector union density 
rate in the United States has declined from a high of 37 percent 
in 1955 to below 7 percent in 2014 (Bureau of Labor Statistics 
2015; Kleiner 2001; Lui 2013).

The advent of many of the same technologies that make 
intermediaries possible has reduced the transaction costs of 
organizing independent workers. Mass organizing on Twitter, 
Facebook, Snapchat, and other social media platforms is in its 
early stages, but opportunities may exist for creative organizers 
to build significant power for independent workers if they are 
not subject to the detailed and burdensome requirements 
of a private sector labor law designed for different kinds of 
work relationships and workplaces. To facilitate organizing 
efforts, intermediaries could even be required to provide 
organizations seeking to represent independent workers 
with the contact information of independent workers  
who work with the intermediary. Nascent organizing efforts  
by some independent worker groups have already begun  
(www.coworker.org; Hudnall 2015).

The main legal challenge for independent workers’ organizing 
activity is federal antitrust law. Section 1 of the Sherman 
Antitrust Act (Sherman Act) establishes that “every contract, 
combination  .  .  . or conspiracy, in restraint of trade or 
commerce among the several States, or with foreign nations, 
is declared to be illegal” (15 U.S.C. §  1). Section 2 of the 
Sherman Act makes it a misdemeanor to “monopolize, or 
attempt to monopolize, or combine or conspire with any 
other person or persons, to monopolize any part of the 
trade or commerce among the several States, or with foreign 
nations” (15 U.S.C. § 2). Similarly, Section 3 holds that “every 
contract, combination . . . , or conspiracy, in restraint of trade 
or commerce” is illegal (15 U.S.C. § 3). The purpose of these 
provisions is to protect free and unfettered competition in 
product and service markets from untoward efforts to “fix” 
the competition for the benefit of particular competitors or 
for competitors against consumers.

The risks these provisions create for independent workers 
seeking to organize are illustrated by the challenges that 
independent physicians encountered in the late 1990s 
when they organized for the purpose of negotiating with 
health maintenance organizations and managed care 
organizations regarding fees, patient care, and other issues. 
In several cases involving nonemployee physicians, the U.S. 

government alleged antitrust violations under the Sherman 
Act. Settlements prohibiting any such organizing effectively 
foreclosed the physicians’ efforts.4  

Employees represented by unions do not face the same 
antitrust limitations. Unions benefit from a “labor exemption” 
from antitrust law when they engage in core activities such 
as organizing, bargaining with employers, or administering 
collective bargaining agreements. The exemption flows from 
very broad language in section 6 of the Clayton Antitrust Act:

The labor of a human being is not a commodity or article of 
commerce. Nothing contained in the antitrust laws shall be 
construed to forbid the existence and operation of labor . . . 
organizations, instituted for the purposes of mutual help . . . or 
to forbid or restrain individual members of such organizations 
from lawfully carrying out the legitimate objects thereof; nor 
shall such organizations, or the members thereof, be held 
or construed to be illegal combinations or conspiracies in 
restraint of trade, under the antitrust laws. (Clayton Antitrust 
Act, 15 U.S.C. § 17)

Further reinforcing the labor exemption, and to cure courts’ 
inability to resist interventions against unions in disputes 
with employers during the first third of the twentieth century, 
both section 20 of the Clayton Antitrust Act (Clayton Act) and 
section 4 of the Norris-LaGuardia Act prohibit injunctions 
that would limit employees’ ability to organize into unions 
and bargain with their employers (29 U.S.C. § 101).

The “labor exemption” is generally available only when a bona 
fide labor organization is promoting legitimate labor interests 
rather than entrepreneurial or other interests unrelated to 
the employer–employee relationship. The labor organization 
also must act independently of any nonlabor group. These 
limitations seek to ensure that labor unions focus their 
organizing and bargaining efforts on the labor market rather 
than on disrupting free competition in product and service 
markets.

The Supreme Court held in Columbia River Packers Assn., 
Inc. v. Hinton (315 U.S. 143 1942), that the exemption is not 
available to associations of independent contractors because 
they cannot form a bona fide labor organization under labor 
law or negotiate over an employment relationship that does 
not exist. Hinton and its progeny may doom any hope that 
the Clayton Act can be interpreted to protect independent 
workers’ organizing from antitrust attacks, despite the fact 
that independent workers principally sell their own labor, as 
contemplated by section 6’s broad declaration. It is possible 
that an argument could be made that independent workers 
are different from independent contractors and, as a result, 
that Hinton should not govern. Yet a better approach seems to 
be for Congress to craft an “independent workers exemption” 
from any antitrust laws that might infringe upon their efforts 

16  A Proposal for Modernizing Labor Laws for Twenty-First-Century Work: The “Independent Worker”



to organize and bargain through the imposition, for example, 
of court injunctions or other judicial remedies.

To advance antitrust law’s interest in protecting product 
and service markets from illicit restraints on competition, 
this independent workers exemption could include the 
same limitations to which the labor exemption is subject: 
independent worker organizations could be required to 
organize around and bargain over their equivalents of wages, 
hours, and the terms and conditions of their contractual 
relationships with the intermediaries. Collective efforts to 
set the prices paid by customers, for example, or to otherwise 
define product or service market outcomes should not 
be exempted. Another option would be to simply include 
independent workers under the NLRA.

ABILITY TO POOL

There are potentially large efficiency advantages if intermediaries 
are able to pool their independent workers for the purpose of 
purchasing or directly providing or administering certain 
benefits for workers. The benefits of risk pooling in insurance 
markets is well known. In essence, pooling 
helps to reduce adverse selection in the 
take-up of insurance that could render 
insurance policies prohibitively expensive 
and cause the entire insurance market 
to cease to exist (Rothschild and Stiglitz 
1976). In addition, by pooling employees 
and jointly purchasing and administering 
certain benefits in bulk, intermediaries 
and their workers could benefit from 
scale economies and superior bargaining 
power that are unavailable to them as 
individuals. As a result, prices almost 
certainly would be significantly lower for 
independent workers and intermediaries 
than for individual purchasers, and both 
services and products could be greater in 
quality, quantity, or both.

Intermediaries could use their scale and pooling opportunities 
to offer independent workers a range of insurance services, tax 
preparation assistance, and financial services. Products and 
services that likely would be offered include auto insurance, 
disability insurance, health insurance and health care, banking 
and savings products, retirement products, and liability insurance. 
Currently, however, intermediaries are loath to take advantage of 
pooling efficiencies because offering benefits to workers would 
raise the risk that their work relationships would be adjudged 
employment by a court or administrative agency. To overcome 
this inefficient predicament, we propose that intermediaries be 
covered by a safe harbor provision such that pooling independent 
workers for purposes of providing benefits would not be legally 
interpreted as an indication of employee status.

Pooling is a common feature of employment relationships, 
and so the ability of intermediaries to pool their independent 
workers to purchase goods and services would approximate 
neutrality between the two statuses. Employers and employees 
would continue to have some advantages, including favorable 
tax treatment for retirement products and health insurance, 
which would provide some incentive to establish employment 
relationships over independent worker relationships. Yet 
our proposal would give independent workers a greater 
opportunity to participate in the social compact than would be 
available were they to be classified as independent contractors.

CIVIL RIGHTS PROTECTIONS

Expanding workplace antidiscrimination protections to 
include independent workers will help make that status 
neutral compared with employee status, extend a key aspect of 
the social compact to independent workers, and help the labor 
market to operate more efficiently.

Employees benefit from protections provided by a broad, 
well-developed, and reasonably effective battery of federal 

employment antidiscrimination statutes. These statutes 
prohibit almost all employers from discriminating against 
their employees or job applicants on the basis of race, national 
origin, color, sex, religion, age, and disability.5 Prohibited 
discriminatory acts may relate to hiring, firing, promotions, 
compensation or training decisions, job shift assignments, 
or almost any decision affecting an employee’s terms and 
conditions of employment. Additional statutes and presidential 
executive orders add groups of employees to those protected 
from discrimination by federal contractors, including LGBT 
Americans and many veterans, and impose affirmative action 
obligations on the contractors.6  

The Hamilton Project  •  Brookings 17

Intermediaries could use their scale and 
pooling opportunities to offer independent 
workers a range of insurance services, tax 

preparation assistance, and financial services.



Workers who are not employees, including independent 
contractors, do not have access to these federal statutory 
antidiscrimination protections. Under existing law, 
independent workers also would not receive such protections. 
In federal law, only section 1981 of the Civil Rights Act of 
1866 (42 U.S.C. § 1981) addresses discrimination in the 
relationships formed between employers and independent 
contractors or independent workers, and it is a starkly 
limited and inadequate tool when compared with employees’ 
protections. In particular, section 1981 prohibits only race 
discrimination,7 although “race” is defined broadly to include 
ancestry and some ethnic characteristics.8 Nonetheless, 
independent contractors and independent workers could not 
bring federal claims if intermediaries discriminate on the 
basis of sex, disability, or age, for example.

Furthermore, section 1981 guards against only intentional 
discrimination, or “disparate treatment” in civil rights 
parlance, and not “disparate impact”—that is, particular 
practices that produce discriminatory results whether 
intended or not. Accordingly, if 98 percent of the relationships 
entered into by an intermediary were with white independent 
workers because the intermediary limits its recruitment to 
wealthier geographic areas in which white workers are grossly 
overrepresented, black and Latino independent workers 
could not bring a successful claim absent some evidence of 
discriminatory intent. Otherwise, however, section 1981 
claims can be used to seek relief for many of the same kinds 
of discriminatory acts prohibited by the federal employment 
discrimination laws.

Section 1981 differs from federal employment discrimination 
laws in some ways that may benefit independent workers, 
however. For example, remedies under section 1981 are more 
expansive and generous than those available under the federal 
employment discrimination laws. Section 1981 claims are 
filed directly in court without a requirement of exhausting 
the administrative process at the U.S. Equal Employment 
Opportunity Commission (EEOC).9 Finally, section 1981’s 
statute of limitations is longer.

The most obvious and straightforward solution to inadequate 
antidiscrimination protections for independent workers 
would be to include them within the protections of the federal 
employment discrimination laws. This approach ensures 
neutrality between employment relationships and independent 
worker relationships while providing more-expansive 
protection against inefficient discriminatory acts in the 
workplace and labor market. With this solution, intermediaries 
would derive the benefits of political compromises that have 
limited damages recoveries and force claims into the EEOC 
processes for mediation and dispute resolution.

Of course, this approach would require congressional action to 
amend these laws. While civil rights laws have been traditionally 
contentious topics in Congress, we believe that amending the 
federal employment discrimination laws is more likely than a 
wholesale rewriting of section 1981 both to expand the list of 
protected groups and to include disparate impact claims. It is 
also substantially more likely than crafting and enacting a new 
and targeted antidiscrimination statute dedicated exclusively to 
the protection of independent workers.

TAX WITHHOLDING AND THE FEDERAL INSURANCE 
CONTRIBUTIONS ACT

Withholding taxes for employees began during World War 
II as a measure to raise revenues to fund the war effort.10 A 
withholding tax is an advance payment toward an employee’s 
final tax liability. In essence, employers deduct a certain 
amount of income from an employee’s weekly or monthly 
paycheck, and remit the money to the IRS as an advance 
payment of income and payroll taxes. If the amount of taxes 
withheld exceeds an employee’s ultimate tax liability, then 
the excess is refunded by the IRS. Tax withholding helps 
employees to smooth their after-tax income throughout the 
year and facilitates revenue collection by the IRS.

Absent their employers withholding their taxes and 
transferring them to the IRS, employees would be responsible 
for making quarterly payments to the IRS on their own, 
or saving sufficient funds to be able to pay their entire tax 
liability when they file their income tax return. Independent 
contractors are responsible for their own tax payments. This 
can be burdensome and create tax penalties if it is not done 
properly, and also can cause fluctuations in consumption and 
asset allocations because independent contractors may be 
required to make a large tax payment when filing their income 
taxes. Because of these added burdens of complying with tax 
laws, there is reason to believe that independent contractors 
are less likely than employees to pay their full tax liabilities 
(Gandhi 1994). So, tax withholding also can be expected to 
produce increased tax compliance, and greater revenues for 
the federal government and the states.

Tax withholding by intermediaries would reduce workers’ 
administrative burden of paying income and social insurance 
taxes. Given economies of scale, withholding services 
provided by intermediaries would also be economically 
efficient and improve compliance with tax laws. We propose 
that intermediaries would be required to provide withholding 
services for income and social insurance taxes owed by all 
independent workers with whom they work. Tax withholding 
by intermediaries would support the principle of neutrality 
between employment status and independent worker status 
since most employees benefit when their employers withhold 
state and federal income and payroll taxes.

18  A Proposal for Modernizing Labor Laws for Twenty-First-Century Work: The “Independent Worker”



In addition, to maintain neutrality with employees, we 
propose that intermediaries pay half of independent workers’ 
contributions toward the Federal Insurance Contributions 
Act (FICA) payroll taxes for Social Security and Medicare. 
Although in the long run, intermediaries are likely to shift the 
ultimate burden of paying for FICA contributions to workers 
through fee adjustments, as explained below, the assignment 
of legal tax liability can potentially affect tax incidence 
in some cases. In addition, tax shifting can take place for 
employees as well, so requiring intermediaries to contribute 
half of FICA contributions will make it easier for employees 
and independent workers to compare their compensation, 
because they will be on more-equal footing.

Our principles that guide the creation of an independent 
worker status lead us to suggest a more nuanced approach to 
some other benefits, such as allowing intermediaries to opt into 
workers’ compensation insurance. We conclude that it would 
not be efficient or feasible to require intermediaries to provide 
this class of workers with other protections and benefits, such 
as overtime protection or unemployment insurance.

WORKERS’ COMPENSATION INSURANCE

State laws typically require that employers provide their 
employees with workers’ compensation insurance. Although 
this paper is principally focused on federal labor, employment, 
and tax laws, workers’ compensation insurance is the oldest 
social insurance program in the United States and undeniably 
an integral part of America’s employment social compact. 
Therefore, we consider it a necessary, if challenging, part of 
any discussion of independent workers.

Workers’ compensation provides cash compensation and 
medical benefits to employees who experience workplace 
injuries or illnesses. In addition, it provides employees’ 
survivors with compensation in the event of a fatality. It 
is a strict liability system—that is, the employee need not 
show that the employer was negligent or otherwise at fault 
in order to collect benefits. Payments are made based on 
a state-established matrix that principally considers the 
severity of the employee’s work-related injury or illness and 
the employee’s tangible economic losses. For example, an 
employee’s permanent total disability would result in greater 
compensation than a partial impairment (Burton 2009).

Workers’ compensation itself is the product of a grand 
bargain. In principle, employees receive reasonably predictable 
compensation for work-related injuries and illnesses without 
the cost and complication of proving in court that their 
employers failed to protect them from injury or illness. In 
return, employers receive immunity from costly lawsuits under 
state tort laws that could result in judgments against them that 
could be many multiples of the amounts they pay for any single 
workers’ compensation claim, or even substantially more.

Because there is no employment relationship with the 
intermediaries with which they work, and therefore no immunity 
provided by workers’ compensation laws, independent workers 
currently are able to use tort law to seek compensation for 
injuries or illnesses that result from their work relationships 
(for fatalities, survivors could bring the claims), assuming they 
are classified as independent contractors. Risk of tort judgments 
should create incentives for intermediaries to use reasonable 
care in their dealings with independent workers.11  

Texas and Oklahoma allow employers to opt out of their state 
workers’ compensation insurance system and employees of 
employers that have opted out of the system are able to bring 
tort actions against their employers, but some employers have 
succeeded in significantly dulling the incentives of these 
states’ tort laws and deprived their employees of fair recoveries 
using the limited damages remedies permitted by ERISA 
(Grabell and Berkes 1974). Because independent workers are 
not employees, ERISA would not be available as a tool to avoid 
responsibility to independent workers under state tort laws 
(ERISA, 29 U.S.C. 18 § 1003(a)).

Tort laws require, in most cases, that an intermediary 
commit some act or omission before being held liable, which 
may more accurately reflect the nature of the relationship 
between intermediaries and independent workers than 
workers’ compensation’s no-fault strict liability system. 
Independent workers generally do not perform their work 
on an intermediary’s premises or use equipment supplied 
by an intermediary. In the case of Uber and Lyft, drivers use 
their own cars. In the case of TaskRabbit and similar apps, 
workers use their own tools or other supplies (or perhaps 
their customers’) to work in their customers’ homes, yards, or 
businesses. In the case of Mechanical Turk and similar apps, 
they are typically working in their homes on their personal 
computers. Thus, a legitimate question can be raised whether 
an intermediary should be expected to take responsibility for 
injuries, illnesses, or fatalities that are more likely than not 
beyond its control, particularly absent any proof of an ability 
to avoid the injury through reasonable care.

It is possible to imagine circumstances in which an 
intermediary’s negligence may cause an injury to an 
independent worker. For example, Task Rabbit may have 
received complaints from independent workers that a 
particular customer has threatened violence against them. If 
Task Rabbit were to send another independent worker without 
prior experience with the customer to that customer’s home 
for an odd job while negligently misrepresenting that there 
had been no complaints against that customer, then tort 
liability might be possible if the customer were to attack the 
independent worker. Similarly, Uber, Lyft, or other driving 
services might require their drivers to submit information 
through their apps while driving in a manner that unduly 

The Hamilton Project  •  Brookings 19



distracts the drivers and leads to accidents and driver injuries. 
Tort liability might be possible in these circumstances as well, 
and provide an appropriate remedy.

Although the tort system may often be the best solution 
for addressing work-related injuries for intermediaries and 
independent workers, it is possible that in some instances 
workers’ compensation insurance would offer a more efficient 
solution, although workers’ compensation would be rife with 
adverse selection concerns if employees can opt into the system. 
We therefore propose that intermediaries be permitted to opt 
to provide expansive workers’ compensation insurance policies 
to the independent workers with which they work without 
transforming these relationships into employment. In exchange 
for this no-fault insurance coverage, intermediaries would receive 
limited liability and protection from tort suits. States would 
provide the legal framework within which these policies would 
operate, but not operate the systems themselves. States could 
require that the policies provide the same level or more protection 
to independent workers than their state workers’ compensation 
system. While opt-in and voluntary systems of insurance can 
create adverse selection and moral hazard problems, experience 
with these policies could inform design changes that might 
reduce these risks over time, and intermediaries would have 
the right to opt out of the system and be subject to tort actions if 
adverse selection and moral hazard cause workers’ compensation 
insurance to be prohibitively expensive.

WAGE AND HOUR PROTECTIONS AND 
UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE

As discussed in greater detail above, measuring the working 
hours of independent workers in the same manner as the hours 
of employees is impossible. This reality of the independent 
worker–intermediary relationship makes certain rules that 
depend on the measurement of working hours—particularly a 
minimum wage for each hour worked and overtime for hours 
worked in a week in excess of forty—impossible to properly 
administer for independent workers. Since their circumstances 
are quite different, neutrality does not require the same legal 
treatment of independent workers and employees. Accordingly, 
similar to independent contractors, independent workers 
would not be covered by the FLSA’s requirements of overtime 
pay and the minimum wage in our proposal.12 Rather, our view 
is that compensation and benefits issues should be the subject 
of bargaining between (preferably organized) independent 
workers and intermediaries. Moreover, the easy entry and exit 
from independent work should provide some protection against 
substandard wages and exploitative work hours.

Similarly, because independent workers control when and 
whether they will work, the fundamental principles of the 
federal–state unemployment insurance system do not apply. 
Unemployment insurance benefits are generally provided to 

employees who lose their jobs through no fault of their own, 
and not to those who voluntarily opt out of their jobs or stop 
working temporarily by choice. Employers pay a tax on their 
payrolls to fund unemployment insurance benefits for laid-off 
employees, although, ultimately, employer-funded benefits of 
this sort are often funded largely out of workers’ wages. Since 
independent workers are not employees, and they would not 
be eligible for unemployment benefits, their earnings would 
not be subject to this payroll tax (Woodbury 2009).

Consistent with our discussion of pooling arrangements above, 
intermediaries should be permitted to pool resources across 
workers and create a private unemployment insurance system, 
or a system of individual accounts for independent workers 
who stop working.13 Such a system could come about as a result 
of collective bargaining between independent workers and 
intermediaries, or it could be established by intermediaries 
acting on their own. Organized independent workers may also 
seek protections against or compensation from intermediaries 
that cease doing business with particular independent workers 
for economic or other reasons that lack sufficient cause. 
Facilitating any or all of these systems would move independent 
worker status closer to neutrality with employee status and 
improve the efficiency of the labor market.

AFFORDABLE CARE ACT AND HEALTH INSURANCE

Maintaining neutrality between independent workers and 
employees after the employer mandate that is part of the 
ACA takes effect presents an important set of challenges. The 
mandate, also known as the Employer Shared Responsibility 
Provision of the Affordable Care Act, requires that firms 
with fifty or more full-time equivalent employees offer health 
insurance that meets minimum value and affordability 
standards for their employees. Employers who do not 
offer such coverage to at least 95 percent of their full-time 
employees are subject to a penalty. The threshold for full-
time employment under the statute is thirty or more hours 
of work per week (26 U.S.C. 43 § 4980H). However, because 
work hours are immeasurable for independent workers, 
determining eligibility for the mandate and for coverage 
under the mandate is problematic. Nonetheless, in our view, 
independent workers should benefit from the social compact 
that supports employer-provided health insurance, and their 
intermediaries bear some responsibility under that compact.

If independent workers are treated like independent 
contractors with respect to the employer mandate, they would 
not be counted toward the 50 full-time employee threshold, 
and intermediaries would not be subject to a penalty for 
failing to offer independent workers health insurance. As a 
result, intermediaries may be viewed as free riding on other 
employers who provide health insurance to their independent 
workers. For example, an independent worker may have a 

20  A Proposal for Modernizing Labor Laws for Twenty-First-Century Work: The “Independent Worker”



traditional employment relationship with an employer on 
another job that provides health insurance or a spouse whose 
employer provides family coverage. Such free riding would 
violate the neutrality principle. Moreover, if independent 
workers turn to exchanges to purchase health insurance and 
receive tax subsidies, intermediaries will have an advantage 
over other employers that would pay a penalty in similar 
circumstances.

Consequently, we propose that intermediaries be required 
to pay a contribution equal to five percent of independent 
workers’ earnings (net of commissions) to support health 
insurance subsidies in the exchange as a solution to the free 
rider problem and to support health insurance tax subsidies. 
This five percent figure could be adjusted over time depending 
on health insurance costs and earnings growth.

The Hamilton Project  •  Brookings 21



In his landmark book The Fissured Workplace, David Weil (2014) offers a thorough account of the shift from traditional bilateral and long-lasting employment relationships 
to more-diverse arrangements principally resulting from 
corporations outsourcing many of their functions. Whether or 
not fissuring of the workplace is the cause, independent workers 
are not the only workers who find themselves in some form of 
triangular relationship with customers and other enterprises 
in U.S. labor markets. Our view is that the application of our 
proposed independent worker category should not be limited to 
the online gig economy. In fact, the very nature of law—treating 
like cases alike—requires that this new category include any 
group of workers who satisfy the definition of independent 
workers we offered above. Accordingly, if there are workers in 
triangular relationships with intermediaries and customers, 
then they should be considered for independent worker status.

We cannot offer a comprehensive list of potential candidates 
for independent worker status in this paper, but some 
obvious candidates should be discussed and analyzed. In 
particular, many traditional taxi drivers (as opposed to Uber 
and Lyft drivers), temporary staffing agency employees, 
labor contractors, members who secure jobs through union 
hiring halls, outside sales employees, and (perhaps) direct 
sales employees occupy the points of triangles with other 
economic actors. In some of these cases, under existing law, an 
employment relationship is formed. In others, the workers are 
classified as independent contractors. Below we evaluate some 
specific cases. In a couple of cases, by applying the principles 
discussed in this paper, we conclude that workers should be 
reclassified (or considered for reclassification) as independent 
workers. In fact, we believe the neutrality principle requires 
it. In other cases, we conclude that there should be no re-
classification given the nature of the work relationship. 

For this latter category of work relationships, we find that 
there are meaningful differences from the independent 
worker-intermediary relationship. As we explain below, in 
several cases, the employer exercises more control over the 
worker’s work hours, work tasks, and means of performing 
the work. As a result, work hours are not immeasurable like 
those of independent workers, and the employer’s greater 
control contributes to the worker’s greater dependence 
upon the employer. In addition, some of these relationships 

are expected to last for longer periods than an independent 
worker’s relationship with an intermediary. This suggests even 
greater worker dependence upon the employer. These factual 
distinctions that are fundamental to the task of classifying 
employees, independent contractors, and independent 
workers should produce different legal results.

We hasten to add that none of these distinctions depend upon 
technology, in general, or the use of an Internet-based app, in 
particular. If a temporary staffing agency or a union hiring hall 
used an online app to conduct its business, our conclusions 
would not change because the core of their business models 
and relationships with workers would not have changed.

TAXI DRIVERS

Nearly 500,000 Americans worked as a taxi or limo driver 
as their main or secondary job per month in 2015, according 
to a tabulation of the Current Population Survey. For the 
tiny percentage of readers who have not encountered them, 
taxi drivers transport customers from place to place by car. 
Taxi drivers may have any of three relationships with taxi 
companies. Owner-operators, in essence, are their own taxi 
companies: the driver owns the taxi and bears responsibility 
for all aspects of the taxi and her work schedule, including 
potentially leasing the taxi to others. There is no triangle in 
this relationship; rather, it is a bilateral relationship between 
the owner-operator and the customer. An owner-operator is 
an independent business. Independent subletters are owner-
operators without the ownership. They lease a taxi, but 
operate it in whatever manner they see fit without direction 
or involvement by the lessor. Again, like owner-operators, 
the relationship is bilateral, not triangular. Thus, like owner-
operators, and other small business owners who lease the 
premises on or in which they work, the best argument is that 
these independent subletters are independent businesses.

The triangular relationship and more complicated classification 
task comes with workers who rent or lease taxis for a day or 
longer, but who essentially work for the taxi company that 
leases the cab. The driver may pay a flat rental fee for the use 
of the taxi for a specified period or receive a portion of the 
day’s fares from the taxi company. Since the lease suggests the 
drivers have assumed some or all of the risk of opportunity 
or loss, these workers are typically classified as independent 

Chapter 5. Are independent workers different from 
other third-party players in labor markets?

22  A Proposal for Modernizing Labor Laws for Twenty-First-Century Work: The “Independent Worker”



contractors. However, the rented taxi is branded with the cab 
company’s name, telephone number, and (perhaps) Web site 
address. Customers who do not hail a taxi on the street (a 
practice that is usually limited to a few large cities and many 
airports) place an order either by phoning the cab company’s 
dispatcher, completing a form on the company’s Web site, 
or using an “e-hailing app” when one is available. The cab 
company then dispatches a taxi driver to pick up the customer 
using a two-way radio system, an in-taxi mobile data terminal, 
or some other communications device.

Apart from the technological difference, this relationship 
between drivers and taxi companies closely resembles the 
triangular relationship between independent worker-drivers, 
ride services such as Uber and Lyft, and riders. It also has 
some indicia of the independent contractor relationship and 
other indicia that it is an employment relationship, just like 
independent workers in the online gig economy. There are 
two principal nontechnological differences that make taxi 
drivers more like employees than independent contractors. 
First, Uber, Lyft, and other online ride services do not 
require drivers to rent the services’ cars. Plainly, both taxi 
drivers and online ride service drivers invest capital in the 
enterprise—cash for taxi drivers, personal cars for the online 
ride services’ drivers—and thereby take on some opportunity 
for profit or loss. Yet the drivers for the online services look 
more like independent contractors in this regard. Drivers for 
the online ride services can benefit by taking a tax deduction 
for depreciation of their vehicles and from the opportunity to 
use their vehicles at their discretion for purposes other than 
driving the services’ customers. Taxi drivers derive neither 
benefit. The taxi companies’ greater control over the vehicles’ 
use and its condition, as well as their ability to depreciate 
the vehicles, suggests that the taxi drivers may be more like 
employees than the online ride services’ drivers in this regard.

Second, with the exception of rides hailed on the street, taxi 
companies appear to have more control over matching customers 
and drivers than the online ride services. Taxi companies often 
decide which taxi will pick up each customer, whereas the online 
ride services leave this choice to their drivers (or at least the choice 
of first refusal), within some broadly defined rules. It also seems 
unlikely that a taxi driver, apart from meal and restroom breaks, 
would stop picking up riders during a shift when she must earn 
back the investment in the taxi rental. Online ride service drivers 
do not have shifts. They float in and out of working, essentially 
at will. This means that taxi companies have greater control over 
their riders’ work processes—another factor that suggests taxi 
drivers are closer to employees than independent contractors.

In sum, taxi drivers who rent or lease their vehicles bear a close 
resemblance to the independent workers that operate in triangular 
relationships in the online gig economy. In particular, they share 
some indicia of independent contractors as well as some indicia of 
employees. The same arguments that suggest that Uber and Lyft 

drivers should qualify as independent workers in our proposed 
legal architecture would apply equally well to many taxi drivers’ 
work relationships. Furthermore, assigning a similar legal 
status to workers in the same relationship with an intermediary, 
regardless of the nature of the technology employed, will support 
the neutrality principle.

TEMPORARY STAFFING AGENCIES

Agencies such as Kelly Services and Manpower provide 
temporary workers to client employers to perform work 
ordinarily undertaken by the client’s employees, typically in 
the client’s workplace. One common compensation scheme 
involves the temporary staffing agency receiving a percentage 
of the temporary worker’s hourly wage for every hour worked. 
There is little question that the client employer forms an 
employment relationship with the worker because it controls 
almost all aspects of the employee’s work and, at least for the 
duration of the relationship, the employee does not and cannot 
work for anyone else during the hours committed to the client 
employer. For this period, the employee is economically 
dependent on the client employer and, to the extent it shares 
decision-making with its client, with the temporary staffing 
agency. These important characteristics of this relationship 
distinguish it from the independent worker’s relationship with 
the intermediary.

A question may arise, however, about whether the temporary 
staffing agency is a “joint employer” of the temporary 
worker.14 In some cases, for example under the FLSA, the 
answer is usually “yes.” But this relationship also differs 
from the independent worker–intermediary relationship. 
The temporary staffing agency ordinarily conducts a skills 
assessment when it begins working with a temporary worker. 
Based on this skills assessment, the agency decides the clients 
and jobs to which the temporary worker will be referred. It 
exercises significant control over the employment relationship 
in this way. Presumably, the worker may refuse some number of 
assignments, but the desire to sustain a continuing relationship 
with the temporary staffing agency would limit these choices. 
The temporary staffing agency may also retain some ability 
to hire and fire the employee, or to transfer her to a new job. 
It almost always pays the employee and takes responsibility 
for tax withholding, payroll taxes, and workers’ compensation 
premiums. Furthermore, as with other employees, there 
is an expectation that the temporary worker will sustain 
a relationship with the agency beyond the completion of a 
particular assignment. In all of these ways, this relationship 
looks like a traditional employment relationship rather than 
the independent worker–intermediary relationship, and it is 
usually treated as an employment relationship.

LABOR CONTRACTORS

Labor contractors operate in a manner that is somewhat 
similar to temporary staffing agencies, but they play a larger 

The Hamilton Project  •  Brookings 23



role in managing the temporary workers in the workplace. 
They find the workers and provide their labor to the client 
employer to fill a temporary need, but the labor contractors 
directly supervise the work of the employees on behalf of the 
client employer, usually in the client’s workplace. In this way, 
the labor contractor’s control over the employee is greater 
than that exercised by the temporary staffing agency, and an 
employment relationship is more likely, as a result.

UNION HIRING HALLS

In certain industries such as construction and maritime, some 
employers find new employees through hiring halls established 
and managed by the unions with which the employers have a 
collective bargaining relationship. The employer identifies a job 
opening, contacts the hiring hall in search of a union member 
to fill the job, and the union runs a form of competition among 
its members—often based, in part, on objective factors like 
seniority in the union, industry, and/or occupation—to fill the 
job. The successful union member becomes an employee of the 
employer for the duration of the job.15

Unlike with independent workers, that relationship with the 
ultimate customer—the employer—is not fleeting. It can last 
months or years. Unlike with temporary workers, the union 
is not a joint employer. It has no role in the employment 
relationship after running the employment competition. 
The hiring occurs according to criteria determined by the 
employer, not the union, with certain boundaries established 
through collective bargaining. Furthermore, the union is 
an instrumentality of the collective of its members. It has 
no independent interest or profit motive. In fact, it receives 
no payment for running the hiring competition. Rather, 
its payment comes in the form of regular dues from its 
members—a payment for collective bargaining and other 
services rendered—and per capita contributions from the 
employer to a trust fund established to finance the hiring hall.

OUTSIDE SALES EMPLOYEES AND DIRECT SALES 
WORKERS

Outside sales employees may be the least like independent 
workers of these examples. They typically receive commissions 
for selling an individual company’s goods within a territory or 
to a list of customers and prospective customers provided by 
that company. Some may receive a small base salary that may 
or may not be charged against the commissions.16 Critically, 
these sales transactions are conducted at the customer’s 
place of business, not at the seller’s facility. Yet the principal 
difference between sales employees and independent workers 
is that the former sells goods and the latter sells services. This 
is more than mere difference in form: In addition to exercising 
some control over territories and target customers, the 
company purveying the goods makes every decision about the 
goods, and often controls aspects of the sales system, including 

marketing. The goods purveyor is ultimately responsible to 
the customer for the quality and performance of the goods. 
Future sales will depend in large part on the quality of the 
product, not on the quality of the salesperson.

The neutrality principle requires us to consider whether direct 
sales workers should be treated like outside sales employees 
given the similarity in their functions, or whether they should 
be independent workers. Direct sales workers also affiliate 
with a company and sell its products. However, there is often 
a meaningful difference: direct sales workers typically have 
greater freedom than outside sales employees to make decisions 
about how, when, and to whom they will sell the company’s 
products. For example, they generally have the ability to set 
their own work hours and days without any direction from the 
purveyor of the goods they sell. Direct sales typically involves 
face-to-face discussions (or the use of personal social media 
channels like Facebook) and product demonstrations that may 
be targeted to friends, neighbors, family, and others. Direct 
sales workers usually earn commissions, but they receive no 
salary. Like independent businesses, some direct sellers have 
the opportunity to recruit additional workers to sell their 
products and, in return, may receive a portion of the new 
seller’s commissions from the company. For these reasons, 
under existing law, they are generally treated as independent 
contractors rather than as employees.

Although they may not be employees, the question of whether 
direct sales workers should be classified as independent 
workers turns principally on the answers to three questions. 
First, what is the extent of the product-purveying company’s 
involvement with the direct sales worker’s customers? If 
the company plays a role in identifying potential customers 
and connecting them to the direct sales worker in a manner 
that resembles the efforts of intermediaries in the online gig 
economy, then the direct sales workers may be independent 
workers. In other words, the workers, companies, and 
customers may have the kind of triangular relationship that 
characterizes the independent worker status. Second, does 
the company or the worker bear the risk and opportunity 
for profit and loss? Independent workers primarily bear 
the risk associated with the amount of time and effort they 
invest in providing direct customer service. Their additional 
investments, like the use of a personal car or tools, are limited. 
But if direct sales workers are required to invest in a sizable 
inventory of products that they may or may not be able to sell, 
whether for themselves or for the sales teams they assemble, 
then they are operating more like independent businesses 
and probably should be classified as independent contractors 
rather than as independent workers. Third, does the purveyor 
of goods exert other forms of control over the workers, such 
as requiring uniforms? If so, this would militate in favor of a 
determination of independent worker status.

24  A Proposal for Modernizing Labor Laws for Twenty-First-Century Work: The “Independent Worker”



In the face of new and emerging work relationships in the online gig economy, this proposal aims to improve worker classification in three significant ways: reducing legal 
uncertainty, enhancing economic efficiency, and strengthening 
the social compact.

REDUCING LEGAL UNCERTAINTY

One of the goals of our proposal is to reduce legal uncertainty 
associated with the determination of employee, independent 
contractor, and independent worker status. In the short run, 
a change in law may introduce some additional uncertainty 
as new statutory, regulatory, and judicial rules are interpreted 
in the context of real-world factual circumstances and 
information about the changed legal rule spreads. It is 
not uncommon, for example, for the amount of litigation 
associated with a particular statute or regulation to increase 
temporarily after an amendment is adopted because the 
amendment disrupts received understandings of the meaning 
and application of the law. Congress could also increase 
uncertainty if new laws are laced with ambiguous language.

On the other hand, a third legal category governing the 
treatment of workers will also reduce uncertainty in both 
the short and long terms. Legal rules defining “independent 
workers” can and should more closely reflect the actual 
experience of workers in that category than the current 
definitions of “employee” and “independent contractor.” As 
a result, employers, workers, lawyers, regulators, and judges 
seeking to apply this new definition to the facts of a particular 
case may find reaching a conclusion about how the law applies 
to these workers both easier and less uncertain. An apt 
metaphor is a large tent that is suspended between two poles 
positioned at distant ends. With only the two poles, the middle 
of the tent will flap sloppily in any reasonably strong wind. But 
the introduction of a third pole to hold up the middle of the 
tent will reduce the flapping and give more shape to the tent, 
even if the tent is not perfectly taut.

One way in which legal uncertainty could be reduced would 
be to establish a default condition, such as a strong rebuttable 
presumption that all workers are employees. Employers could 
seek to rebut the presumption by demonstrating that the 
workers satisfy all elements of independent contractor status, 
which would have to be clearly articulated in a new legal rule. 

Although, as noted above, some countries have established a 
default rule of this sort, careful deliberation and debate would 
be required to determine if a default rule is appropriate in the 
context of the U.S. labor market.

ENHANCING ECONOMIC EFFICIENCY

In an ideal labor market with no frictions and perfect 
information, the cost of many of the benefits that employers are 
legally required to provide to employees would be ultimately 
borne by employees themselves in the form of lower wages. In 
other words, the cost of benefits—like taxes—can be shifted 
from one party to another. Indeed, in the case of mandated 
benefits, the likelihood of shifting costs from employers to 
employees is even higher than it is for taxes since employees 
directly value the benefits that they receive, which leads to an 
outward shift in labor supply (Summers 1989).

Of course, the labor market often is characterized by frictions 
and imperfect information. This is particularly likely to be 
the case in traditional employment relationships, where the 
employment relationship is expected to endure and employees 
and employers make investments in the relationship. Moreover, 
individual employees typically face bargaining disadvantages 
compared with employers. In this situation, the assignment of 
which party is initially required to pay for benefits can affect 
the party that ultimately bears the cost of the benefits. The 
default can matter in a bargaining model.

Research has found that 80 percent or more of employers’ 
costs of providing employee benefits, such as health insurance 
or workers’ compensation insurance, is ultimately borne by 
employees in the form of lower wages (Gruber 1994; Gruber 
and Krueger 1991). In addition, the lion’s share of payroll taxes 
are likely to be shifted from employers to employees because 
labor supply is more inelastic than labor demand.

These observations suggest that most of the economic impact 
of requiring intermediaries to provide certain benefits or 
pay for certain payroll taxes will ultimately be offset in the 
form of lower net fees collected by independent workers and 
higher commissions taken by intermediaries. For example, if 
an intermediary is required to pay for half of its independent 
workers’ Social Security contributions, whereas before 
independent contractors paid for both halves themselves, fee 

Chapter 6. Economic Analysis of the Proposal

The Hamilton Project  •  Brookings 25



schedules that remunerate independent workers will likely 
eventually be adjusted to reduce the independent workers’ 
compensation by the amount of the intermediary’s Social 
Security contributions.

This analysis changes, however, when the independent worker 
status enables intermediaries to provide benefits in a more 
efficient manner than would be the case under independent 
contractor status. For example, if intermediaries can provide 
life insurance benefits more cheaply than workers could 
purchase them on their own, then a surplus is created that 
enables both sides to benefit.

In the standard Coasian explanation for why firms employ 
workers as opposed to contracting with external parties to 
provide services, transaction costs make it more efficient 
for firms to directly employ and supervise workers than to 
specify and monitor all of the contingencies required for their 
services in a contract. Firms thus find it more efficient to use 
hierarchies, directives, and internal structures to ensure that 
the desired work is performed. The emerging online apps have 
the potential to greatly reduce the transaction costs associated 
with contracting and monitoring the provision of certain 
services. Thus, the Coasian explanation for the growth of 
online intermediaries is that new computer and information 
technology enables a more efficient means for companies 
to contract with third parties (i.e., technology lowers the 
transaction costs that induce companies to hire employees 
rather than to contract work out).

The Coasian analysis overlooks the role of rent sharing, 
morale, and internal labor markets within firms. Because 
employee morale is critical for productivity, and because 
morale is affected by employees’ perceptions of fairness, firms 
often find that they must share some rents with workers in 
order to maintain high morale, quality, and productivity 
(Blanchflower, Oswald, and Sanfey 1996). Rent sharing is more 
likely to occur in less-competitive industries that have product 
market rents to share, in highly unionized industries, and in 
highly capital-intensive industries. If networking technology 
leads to more disintermediation of traditional employment, it 
could have the effect of reducing rent sharing while it raises 
productivity. This is less likely in industries where most of the 

work is already conducted by independent contractors, such as 
taxi services, or in sectors where product markets are highly 
competitive and employees are nonunionized.

The standard Coasian analysis assumes a perfectly competitive 
and efficient labor market with no transaction costs. However, 
in actual labor markets workers and firms often implicitly or 
explicitly (in the case of unionized workplaces) bargain over 
wages and face significant frictions that create transaction 
costs. Although the legal assignment of responsibility for 
paying taxes or funding benefits is irrelevant in a competitive 
market because the ultimate incidence would be shifted 
between the parties based on their relative elasticities of supply 
and demand, if a work relationship is marked by bargaining 
power, then switching the party responsible for paying for 
taxes or benefits can have consequences for incidence. The 
legal assignment of responsibilities, for example, is likely to 
affect the default position in bilateral bargaining settings, and 
thus to influence the ultimate outcomes.

STRENGTHEN THE SOCIAL COMPACT

Over the course of the 20th Century, a social compact developed 
between employees and employers in the U.S. that protected 
employees from dangerous working conditions, provided a 
minimum level of economic security, and defined norms of 
fairness. The social compact has served workers, employers, 
and society well. This social compact is jeopardized by the 
misclassification of employees into independent contractor 
status. It is also challenged by emerging forms of work that do 
not fit neatly into the employee-employer relationship. 

Establishing a new legal classification for independent workers 
would help to strengthen the social compact. In particular, 
components of the social compact that are appropriate for 
their working relationship, such as Civil Rights protection 
and the right to collectively bargain, would be extended to 
independent workers. This would have the immediate effect 
of bringing more workers under the umbrella of important 
components of the social compact. In addition, adhering 
to the neutrality principle would help maintain the social 
compact for traditional employees by reducing the incentive 
for employers to reclassify workers as independent contractors.  

26  A Proposal for Modernizing Labor Laws for Twenty-First-Century Work: The “Independent Worker”



The online gig economy represents a small but rapidly growing segment of the workforce, especially in the ride-sharing and food-delivery sectors. This new 
and emerging sector has the potential to provide many new 
opportunities for workers and customers but raises serious 
challenges to the administration of existing employment, 
labor, and tax law. In particular, the workers who utilize 
intermediaries to identify customers to deliver services, such 
as car rides, do not fit neatly into existing legal categories of 
independent contractors and employees. We have sought 
to craft a new employment status that we call “independent 
workers,” to fill this void and improve the efficiency and 
fairness of the labor market, and reduce legal uncertainty. 
Many workers in the “offline economy” who are currently 

classified as independent contractors, such as taxi drivers, 
would also fit into this new category. 

Independent workers would receive some protections and 
benefits of employees, such as the right to organize and the 
requirement that intermediaries contribute half of Social 
Security and Medicare payroll taxes, but not others, such as 
time-and-a-half for overtime hours. Most importantly, we 
think that reforms along the lines that we propose would help 
to protect and extend the hard-earned social compact that has 
protected workers and improved living standards over the 
past century, reduce uncertainty, and enhance the efficient 
operation of the labor market.

Chapter 7. Conclusion

The Hamilton Project  •  Brookings 27



Chapter 8. Appendix

APPENDIX TABLE 

Description of Several Prominent Online Intermediary Companies

Description/Business Model Date Formed Size

Agent 

Anything

• Similar to TaskRabbit, but only college 
students perform tasks (must verify 
through .edu email address).

• Client posts a “mission” and a price; an 
interested agent accepts the mission and 
becomes responsible for completing it.

• Also has option to facilitate bidding among 
agents. This model appears to be a hybrid 
between TaskRabbit’s new model (where the 
client is presented with options to choose among) 
and old model (where the Taskers bid for tasks).

• June 2010: 
founded

N/A

Axiom • Provides “tech-enabled legal services” 
including data analytics of contracts, due 
diligence, adjusting to regulatory changes, 
etc. Axiom also provides secondments 
(temporary in-house counsel).

• Attorneys and staff are paid an annual 
salary, but only for the months actually 
worked/staffed on project.

• 1999: founded • 1,500 employees in 11 offices.

• Recently signed a $73M contract 
to handle a trade agreement.

• Almost $200M in sales as of summer 2015.

• $28M in 2013 from 1 investor.

Caviar • Similar to GrubHub, but specializes 
in delivering to restaurants that 
ordinarily do not deliver their food.

• Couriers are compensated per-
delivery. They are interviewed and 
background checked but not trained.

• Takes 25% commission per delivery.

• March 2013: 
launched 

• Caviar was acquired in August 2014 by 
“Square” (portable iPhone device for credit card 
payments). Caviar received only Square stock 
in the transaction but was valued at $90M.

• By August 2014, had raised 
$15M in venture funding. 

ChaCha • A Web site and app launched in 2006. Users 
get answers to questions—essentially, a search 
engine where answers are generated by 
humans (“Guides”) rather than by an algorithm.

• Guides are paid a few cents for each 
question they answer. ChaCha has some 
rules about who can become a Guide—e.g., 
must have access to highspeed internet, 
must complete training and orientation, 
and pass a “Readiness Test.” 

• 2006: founded • In 2006, ChaCha had over $100M in 
funding and was generating excitement, 
however by 2015 it had laid off most of its 
employees and appears to be declining 
rapidly in value and in market-share.

28  A Proposal for Modernizing Labor Laws for Twenty-First-Century Work: The “Independent Worker”



Description/Business Model Date Formed Size

Clickworker 

GmbH

• Similar to Mechanical Turk, but 
specifically for standardized tasks that 
cannot be done by a computer.

• “Clickworkers” provide a variety of services, 
including taking surveys, digitalization, 
translation, creating content, and doing 
Web research. Clients come to Clickworker 
with a project, Clickworker breaks down the 
project into smaller tasks, doles out the work 
to individual clickworkers, and conducts 
quality control over the final product.

• Clickworkers use their own computers and 
choose their own hours. Clickworker tests and 
trains the individual clickerworkers to determine 
which worker is suitable for what tasks.

• 2005: founded as 
humangrid GmbH

• 2011: relaunched 
as online 
marketplace

• Reportedly has worked with 700,000 
freelancers in 136 countries.

• $14.2M in funding as of July 2013.

Curb • Similar to Uber, but draws on a pool of 
licensed taxi drivers. Standard taxi rates 
apply; the benefit to the rider is tracking 
the ride through an app similar to Uber. It 
appears the pay structure is the same as in an 
ordinary taxi setting: the app merely facilitates/
modernizes the process of hailing a cab.

• 2007: founded as 
RideCharge, an 
online platform to 
book and expense 
ground travel for 
business travelers

• 2009: becomes 
Taxi Magic, a 
mobile app for 
ordering taxis 
on demand

• August 2014: 
rebrands as Curb

• Available in 60 cities.

• Draws on 35K cars from 90 cab companies.

• $10.7M in funding as of August 2014.

Eden 

McCallum

• Management consulting firm that relies on 
a stable of independent consultants who 
are selected to teams to work on projects. 
Consultants can decline any project.

• 2000: founded • Over 500 independent consultants.

• Over 1,500 projects completed.

• Revenue unclear, but Harvard Business Review 
reported it was a “$40M firm” in 2012.

Fiverr • Sellers offer services ranging from 
graphic design to translation.

• The default price is a fixed $5 fee, although 
the fixed price can be set higher.

• Fiverr profits by taking a processing fee from 
the buyer and taking a cut of the fee paid 
to the seller. Sellers collect $4 for a $5 “gig” 
completed. Buyer pays a $.50 processing fee 
on purchases $10 and under. For purchases 
over $10, the processing fee is 5%.

• As sellers complete orders and maintain 
low cancellation rates and 4+ star rating, 
they can move up “levels” which offer 
more perks—especially greater exposure 
on the Web site and ability to have 
more gigs listed at the same time.

• February 2010: 
launched

• Ranked among 100 most popular Web sites in 
the US (and top 150 in the world) since 2013.

• Raised $30M in Series C funding in August 
2014, bringing total funding to $50M.

• Claims over 300M gigs completed since 2010.

The Hamilton Project  •  Brookings 29



Description/Business Model Date Formed Size

Gengo • Crowdsourced language translation 
services headquartered in Tokyo.

• Translators must pass a proprietary proficiency 
exam. Translation quality is monitored.

• Businesses post translation work to the 
platform. Translators self-assess the difficulty 
and timeline. If interested, the translator 
selects the job and begins to work.

• Standard rate charged is $.06/word; 
standard rate paid is $.03/word. Higher 
rates apply for more difficult work. 

• 2008: founded 
as myGengo

• 2012: rebranded 
as Gengo 

• 10,000+ registered translators.

• As of May 2015, had raised $24.2M 
in 6 rounds from 23 investors.

• 2013 Series B investment of $12M.

Grubhub • A large, public company that delivers food 
from local restaurants. It has begun developing 
its own delivery service that will function like 
Curb’s delivery service. It previously relied 
on the restaurants’ own delivery teams.

• 2004: founded

• 2013: merges 
with Seamless

• 700 US cities and London.

• Approx. 174K order placed daily.

• Trading on NYSE at $27.34/share on 9/14/2015.

Handy • Allows individuals to hire home 
cleaners, plumbers, or handymen.

• Individuals select a day/time and project, 
and Handy selects and dispatches a 
“professional” to assist. Individuals cannot 
review or select the professional.

• Professionals are background 
checked and insured.

• Handy takes 20 percent of booking price.

• 2012: founded • $60.7M in 5 rounds of funding from 9 investors.

• Available in 37 cities across 
US, UK, and Canada.

• By June 2015 claims to have 
completed 1 million bookings.

Hourly Nerd • Businesses hire freelance consultants (current 
MBA students and graduates) on an hourly 
basis. Consultants choose their own fees 
and create their own profiles. Businesses 
submit a project and outline their needs.

• HourlyNerd’s algorithm generates 
appropriate “experts” who then submit bids 
for the businesses to choose among.

• HourlyNerd restricts the “nerds” to those who 
have graduated from certain selective schools.

• Consultants are also provided 
with a “proprietary toolkit” as well 
as formatting templates.

• Takes a 14.5 percent commission.

• February 2013: 
launched

• 10,000 consultants.

• Raised $7.8M in Series B (in February 2015).

Instacart • Same-day shopping and delivery from stores 
like Whole Foods, Costco, and Petco.

• In summer 2015 Instacart divided the shopping 
and delivery role. Shoppers have the option 
to switch to employee status, but drivers 
may not. Most shoppers have switched.

• For orders over $35, Instacart charges $3.99 
for orders delivered in 2 hours and $5.99 
for deliveries within the hour. For orders 
under $35 (but over $10), two hour deliveries 
are $7.99 and hour deliveries are $9.99. 
During “Busy Periods” these base prices 
rise. Instacart also offers a membership that 
is $99/year, but free 2-hour deliveries.

• On top of delivery fees, the customer pays 
for the groceries, which are priced based on 
agreements between Instacart and the retailer. 

• July 2012: founded • 7K shoppers in 16 US cities.

• $274.8M in 5 rounds of investing. 

30  A Proposal for Modernizing Labor Laws for Twenty-First-Century Work: The “Independent Worker”



Description/Business Model Date Formed Size

Lyft • Peer-to-peer ridesharing app similar to Uber.

• Takes a 20 percent commission.

• Summer 2012: 
launched as a 
short-distance 
ride share offshoot 
of Zimride that 
connected riders 
and drivers for 
long distances 
to split costs (not 
a paid service)

• $1B in venture funding.

• Valued at $2.5B.

• Operates in 65 U.S. cities.

Mechanical 

Turk

• Part of Amazon.

• Crowdsourcing online marketplace 
connecting individuals (“Turkers”) and 
businesses (“Requesters”) to do work that 
computers cannot (e.g., writing product 
descriptions, selecting the “best” picture).

• Turkers browse available jobs and complete 
them at a payment rate set by the employer.

• Unknown: founded 
for Amazon’s 
internal use

• 2005: launched 
to the public

• N/A

Medicast • On-demand “house call” doctor visits. Patients 
can choose from three subscription levels: 
Plus ($39/mo for two visits spread over 12 
months), Premium ($75/mo for 4 visits over 12 
months); On Demand (one-time visit for $249 
with an added night/weekend fee of $100).

• Doctors are paid according to the number 
of patients seen per day. They are provided 
an iPad with Medicast resources on it. 

• 2013: founded • 1.94M in 2 rounds of funding.

• Currently operating in Miami/South 
Florida and LA/Orange County.

Red Beacon • Peer-to-peer task outsourcing.

• Similar to Task Rabbit, but 
specifically for household services 
(e.g., repairing leaky faucet).

• Model: (1) a client describes the size and 
scope of the project, (2) Red Beacon sends 
a list of qualified repair people, (3) the client 
selects up to five to interview, (4) the selected 
repair people contact the client to discuss 
the project and name a price. The client then 
selects one to perform the task based on 
reviews, description of expertise, and price. 

• 2008: founded

• 2012: purchased 
by Home Depot

• Home Depot, Inc. purchased for 
an undisclosed amount.

Samasource • Similar to Mechanical Turk: provides 
business services to companies. 
Samasource breaks down large-scale 
projects and sources it out to workers.

• Major difference is that it is a 501(c)
(3)—its central aim is helping 
workers in developing nations.

• Samasource trains workers in 
basic computer skills.

• -Samasource takes a “small 
cut” of each transaction.

• June 2008: 
founded

• As of March 2015 has had 6,527 workers.

• Raised $1.5M in 12 rounds from 8 Investors.

The Hamilton Project  •  Brookings 31



Description/Business Model Date Formed Size

Shyp • Individuals and businesses pay Shyp 
to package and send any item.

• “Shyp Heroes” have been background 
checked and “extensively” trained at Shyp 
Academy. They are not allowed to accept tips.

• Shyp appears to be moving away entirely 
from peer-to-peer or contract models 
and toward an employee model. 

• March 2014: 
launched

• Operates in 5 cities.

• As of September 2015 it has raised $62.2M.

Sidecar • Similar to Uber/Lyft but drivers can set 
their own prices. Riders can also screen 
drivers by selecting a ceiling for how much 
they are willing to pay for a ride. This 
includes electing to share the ride with a 
stranger headed in the same direction.

• Sidecar also offers a delivery service, which 
is now its primary focus (according to their 
CEO in a statement in August 2015).

• Takes a 25 percent fee from each transaction.

• January 2012: 
launched

• Operates in 8 U.S. cities.

• $35M in venture funding.

Skillshare • Peer-to-peer courses/classes.

• “Teachers” create video content for the 
Web site, teaching skills from a variety of 
areas (e.g., how to use InDesign, how to 
build a Web site, how to do calligraphy). 
”Members” subscribe to view the video 
classes for a monthly fee. Teachers earn 
money through a royalties pool and also can 
earn bonuses for recruiting other teachers.

• Skillshare provides teachers with materials 
to help them get started on creating content. 
Skillshare also establishes “class guidelines” 
that teachers must follow (including 
resolution quality, minimum duration, and 
level of creativity/educational nature).

• Skillshare takes 50 percent of the 
Premium Membership revenue.

• November 2010: 
founded

• April 2011: site 
went live 

• As of March 2014 it was valued at $20M.

• By March 2014 it had raised 
$10.8M in venture funding.

Task Rabbit • Online and mobile marketplace to 
outsource small jobs and tasks.

• Users name a task and a price and then 
Task Rabbit assigns a Tasker to the job.

• Task Rabbit used to be a bidding-model 
marketplace until its July 2014 reboot. 
Now, Taskers are assigned instead of 
bidding, they must wear a uniform, and 
tasks are paid on an hourly basis.

• Task Rabbit takes about 20 
percent commission.

• 2008: founded • 2M users.

• 50,000 Taskers.

• $134M valuation. 

Thumbtack • Online marketplace for services (e.g., wedding 
officiating, personal training, wall painting).

• Thumbtack vets the professionals 
(checking licenses, etc.).

• Users describe what service they need 
performed. If interested, professionals can 
pay $3-25 to send a quote to the potential 
customer. The user then evaluates the quotes 
and selects a professional to complete the task.

• 2009: founded • 150,000 professionals available.

• 5 million projects/year.

• August 2014: raised $100M through Series 
D round of venture capital funding. 

32  A Proposal for Modernizing Labor Laws for Twenty-First-Century Work: The “Independent Worker”



Description/Business Model Date Formed Size

Uber • Peer-to-peer ridesharing app.

• App determines the price for each ride.

• Typically takes 20 percent commission 
and collects fee for insurance.

• 2009: launched 
black car service

• 2012: launched 
UberX (taxi-like 
service with 
regular cars)

• $7B in venture funding.

• Valued at $50B.

• Available in 58 countries and 300 cities. 

Upwork • Connect businesses with freelance workers 
(e.g., computer programming, translating, 
legal work). Similar to Mechanical Turk.

• A business posts a job onto the platform and 
interested freelancers apply. The business 
interviews the interested applicants and 
decides. Business decides if payment 
is made per hour or per project.

• Upwork takes 10 percent commission.

• 2003: founded as 
Elance-oDesk

• 2015: rebranded 
as Upwork

• 4 million registered clients.

• 9 million registered freelancers.

• $1B in work done per year.

Washio • “Uber for laundry.” Delivers 
laundry and dry cleaning.

• Customers place an order on the app, 
specifying a time window for pickup and 
drop off. “Ninjas” collect the clothes, which 
are dry cleaned or washed, dried, and 
folded. Customers can have clothes picked 
up within 30 minutes with WashioNow.

• Ninjas must have a driver’s license, smart 
phone, and a car made after 2000.

• 2013: founded • $13M in venture funding.

The Hamilton Project  •  Brookings 33



Authors

Professor Alan B. Krueger 
Princeton University

Professor Seth D. Harris 
Cornell University

Alan B. Krueger is the Bendheim Professor of Economics and 
Public Affairs at Princeton University. He served as Chairman 
of President Barack Obama’s Council of Economic Advisers 
from November 2011 to August 2013, and was a member of 
the President’s Cabinet. In 2009-10, he served as Assistant 
Secretary for Economic Policy and Chief Economist of the 
U.S. Department of the Treasury and in 1994-95 he served 
as Chief Economist of the U.S. Department of Labor. He is 
the founding Director of the Princeton University Survey 
Research Center. He wrote for the New York Times Economic 
Scene column and Economix blog from 2000 to 2009. Krueger 
was named a Sloan Fellow in Economics in 1992 and an 
NBER Olin Fellow in 1989-90. He was editor of the Journal 
of Economic Perspectives from 1996 to 2002. He was elected 
a Fellow of the Econometric Society in 1996, a fellow of the 
Society of Labor Economists in 2005, and a member of the 
Executive Committee of the American Economic Association 
in 2004.  Professor Krueger was awarded the Kershaw Prize 
by the Association for Public Policy and Management in 1997 
for the most significant contributions to public policy research 
by someone under age 40, elected a fellow of the American 
Academy of Arts & Sciences in 2002, and awarded the IZA 
Prize in Labor Economics in 2006. He earned a BS degree 
with honors from Cornell University in 1983 and a PhD in 
Economics from Harvard University in 1987.

Seth D. Harris is a Distinguished Scholar at Cornell University’s 
School of Industrial & Labor Relations. He served four and one-
half years as the Deputy US Secretary of Labor and six months 
as Acting US Secretary of Labor and a member of President 
Barack Obama’s Cabinet.  Beginning in January 2007, he chaired 
Obama for America’s Labor, Employment and Workplace Policy 
Committee, and later founded the campaign’s Disability Policy 
Committee. He also advised then-Senator Obama on issues arising 
in the Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee. 
In August 2008, he joined the Obama-Biden transition planning 
committee’s Agency Review Working Group. After Election Day 
2008, he oversaw the Obama-Biden transition team’s efforts in 
the Labor, Education and Transportation departments and 12 
other agencies.  From 1997 to 2000, he served as Counselor to 
Secretary of Labor Alexis Herman. From 1993 to 1997, he served 
as Acting Assistant Secretary of Labor for Policy, Deputy Assistant 
Secretary of Labor for Policy, and Special Assistant to Secretary 
Robert of Labor Reich. Prior to re-joining the Labor Department 
in 2009, he served as a professor of law at New York Law School 
and director of its Labor and Employment Law programs, as well 
as a visiting professor of law at Seton Hall Law School. He served 
as a law clerk to Judge William Canby of the US Court of Appeals 
for the Ninth Circuit and to Judge Gene Carter of the US District 
Court for the District of Maine. He has published extensively on 
workplace and employment issues, from both legal and economic 
perspectives. He earned a BS degree with honors from Cornell 
University in 1983 and a JD cum laude from New York University 
School of Law in 1990 where he was the Editor-in-Chief of the 
Review of Law and Social Change.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank David Cho and Carolyn Wald for excellent 
research assistance. Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach and 
Larry Katz provided helpful comments on an earlier draft. 

Disclosure
Seth Harris has no economic relationship with any company 
operating in the online gig economy. In the interest of full 
disclosure, Alan Krueger acknowledges that he has coauthored 
a study commissioned by Uber in the past, although he has no 
ongoing relationship with the company or any other company 
operating in the online gig economy.

34  A Proposal for Modernizing Labor Laws for Twenty-First-Century Work: The “Independent Worker”



Endnotes

1. Extensive litigation and administrative decision making is already under 
way involving Uber and other intermediaries. See, e.g., O’Connor v. Uber 
Techs., 2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 116482, 80 Cal. Comp. Cases 852 (N.D. Cal. 
2015); Levin v. Caviar Inc., Case No. 15-1285 (N. D. Cal. 2015); Singer v. 
Postmates, Case No. 14-1284 (N.D. Cal 2015.)

2. Truck drivers offer an instructive example. Compare North American Van 
Lines, Inc. v. N.L.R.B. [National Labor Relations Board], 869 F.2d 596 (D.C. 
Cir. 1989) (under the National Labor Relations Act [NLRA], truck drivers 
are independent contractors) with Aetna Freight Lines, Inc. v. N.L.R.B., 
520 F.2d 928, (6th Cir. 1975) (under NLRA, truck drivers are employees). 
Compare also Redwine v. Refrigerated Transport Co., 84 S.E.2d 478 (Ga. 
Ct. App. 1954) (under state unemployment insurance law, truck drivers 
are employees) and Rozran v. Durkin, 381 Ill. 97, 45 N.E.2d 180 (Ill. 1942) 
(under state unemployment insurance law, truck drivers are employees); 
with Nat’l Trailer Convoy, Inc. v. Undercofler, 137 SE2d 328 (Ga. Ct. 
App. 1964) (under state unemployment insurance law, truck drivers are 
independent contractors) and Hammond v. Dep’t of Empl.,480 P2d 912 
(Idaho 1971) (under state unemployment insurance law, truck drivers are 
independent contractors).

3. There is a subtle but important distinction between a company like Apple 
and Lyft in this regard. Apple does not manufacture iPhones, which are 
integral to its business, but instead contracts out their manufacture to 
Foxconn and other suppliers. Apple is not an intermediary that hires 
independent workers to provide personal services to third-party customers. 
Rather, it enters into a bilateral relationship with Foxconn in which Apple 
buys what Foxconn produces according to Apple’s specifications. Foxconn 
does not interact with Apple’s customers. Apple contracts with Foxconn to 
produce a good that Apple and others sell to customers.

4. See, e.g., United States v. Federation of Physicians and Dentists, Inc., CA 98-
475 JJF (D. Del. Oct. 22, 2001) (consent decree), http://www.justice.gov/atr/
case-document/proposed-final-judgment-116; United States v. Federation 
of Certified Surgeons and Specialists, Inc., 64 Fed. Reg. 5831 (Dep’t 
Justice 1999) (consent decree); Federal Trade Commission v. College of 
Physicians and Surgeons of Puerto Rico, https://www.ftc.gov/enforcement/
cases-proceedings/9710011/college-physicians-surgeons-puerto-rico-
centralmed-inc-fajardo. See generally Kennedy 2014 at 155–60; Brewbaker 
2000.

5. Title VII of the Civil Rights Act, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e (1964) (prohibiting 
employment discrimination on the basis of sex, race, color, national origin, 
and religion); Age Discrimination in Employment Act, 29 U.S.C. §§ 621–
634 (1967) (prohibiting age discrimination against anyone at least forty 
years of age); Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 101–336 (1990) 
(prohibiting discrimination against people with disabilities); Equal Pay Act, 
29 U.S.C. § 206 (1963) (prohibiting employment discrimination between 
employees on the basis of sex by paying unequal wages for equal work).

6. Exec. Order No. 11,246, 41 C.F.R. 60-1.1 (1978) (prohibiting U.S. 
government contractors from employment discrimination on the basis 
of race, color, religion, sex, or national origin); Exec. Order No. 13,672, 
41 C.F.R. 60-4.9 (2014) (prohibiting U.S. government contractors from 
discriminating on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity); 
Rehabilitation Act, 29 U.S.C. § 503 (1973) (prohibiting discrimination 
on the basis of disability in programs conducted by federal agencies, 

programs receiving federal funding, in federal employment, and by federal 
contractors); Vietnam Era Veterans’ Readjustment Assistance Act, 38 
U.S.C. § 4212 (1974) (prohibiting discrimination by employers and federal 
contractors against disabled veterans and veterans who served active duty 
during war).

7. Some state laws protect a long list of groups. See, e.g., Minn. Stat. § 363A.17 
(providing that it is an unfair discriminatory practice for a business “to 
intentionally refuse to do business with, to refuse to contract with, or to 
discriminate in the basic terms, conditions, or performance of the contract 
because of a person’s race, national origin, color, sex, sexual orientation, 
or disability, unless the alleged refusal or discrimination is because of a 
legitimate business purpose”).

8. For example, Section 1981 has been applied not only to discrimination 
against African-Americans and white Americans, but also against Latinos, 
Jews, and Arabs. See, e.g., St. Francis Coll. v. Al-Khazraji, 481 U.S. 604 
(1987); Shaare Tefila Congregation v. Cobb, 481 U.S. 615 (1987); see also 
Pourghoraishi v. Flying J, 449 F.3d 751 (7th Cir. 2006) (collecting cases).

9. It is worth noting, however, that the difference in forum may disadvantage 
low-wage workers who may be unable to afford private counsel to bring a 
claim in federal court. Complaints can be filed with the EEOC without the 
assistance of counsel, although the EEOC is not an adjudicative body and 
may not be able to generate a resolution of the complaint.

10. Ironically, Milton Friedman was a key contributor in the group at the 
U.S. Treasury Tax Research Department that helped develop the idea of 
withholding taxes (Taylor 2014).

11. We do not seek to address the agency law question of whether an 
intermediary should be held liable for the negligent or intentionally 
tortious acts of the independent workers with which it does business. This 
is not fundamentally an employment question and it would not be resolved 
by federal laws. Rather, it is an issue for state courts and legislatures.

12. To the contrary, most aspects of the FLSA’s protections against exploitative 
child labor do not require measuring work hours. For this reason, these 
same protections should apply in the world of independent workers to 
guard against any opportunity for this new form of work relationship to be 
used for the exploitation of children.

13. Senator Mark Warner (D-VA) has been on the vanguard in considering 
alternative models for providing independent workers with social safety 
net benefits. See, for example, Warner (2015).

14. The NLRB recently reconsidered and significantly expanded its definition 
of joint employment, for example. See See Browning-Ferris Indus,. Case 
32-RC-109684 (NLRB Aug. 27, 2015) (Decision on Review and Direction). 

15. These jobs often have fixed terms or are associated with the completion of 
a particular task, like constructing a building or sailing a cargo ship from 
one port to another.

16. Perhaps because of the prevalence of commissions in outside sales, 
Congress exempted outside sales employees from the FLSA’s minimum 
wage and overtime protections (29 U.S.C. § 213(a)(1)). The fact that 
Congress felt the need to exempt these workers from the FLSA’s protections 
strongly suggests that it had concluded these workers otherwise would be 
treated as employees.

The Hamilton Project  •  Brookings 35



Blanchflower, David G., Andrew J. Oswald, and Peter Sanfey. 1996. 
“Wages, Profits, and Rent-Sharing.” Quarterly Journal of 
Economics 111: 277–51.

Brewbaker, William S. 2000. “Physician Unions and the Future of 
Competition in the Health Care Sector.” 33 U.C. Davis Law 
Review (545).

Browning-Ferris Indus. 2015. National Labor Relations Board. Case 
32-RC-109684

Brudney, James J. 2005. “Neutrality Agreements and Card Check 
Recognition: Prospects for Changing Labor Relations 
Paradigms.” Iowa Law Review 90: (819).

Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). 2015, January 28. “The Economics 
Daily.” U.S. Department of Labor, Washington, DC. 

Burton Jr., John F. 2009. “Workers’ Compensation.” In Labor and 
Employment Law and Economics, edited by Kenneth G. 
Dau-Schimdt, Seth D. Harris, and Orly Lobel, 235–74. 
Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing.

Estlund, Cindy. 2002. “The Ossification of American Labor Law.” 
Columbia Law Review 102 (1527).

Gandhi, Natwar M. 1994. “Improving Independent Contractor 
Compliance with Tax Laws.” U.S. Government 
Accountability Office, Washington, DC.

Grabell, Michael, and Howard Berkes. 1974. “Inside Corporate 
America’s Campaign to Ditch Workers’ Comp.” ProPublica.

Gruber, Jonathan. 1994. “The Incidence of Mandated Maternity 
Benefits.” American Economic Review 83 (3): 622–41.

Gruber, Jonathan, and Alan Krueger. 1991. “The Incidence of 
Mandated Employer-Provided Insurance: Lessons from 
Workers’ Compensation Insurance.” Tax Policy and the 
Economy 5: 111–43.

Hall, Johnathan, and Alan Krueger. 2015. “An Analysis of the Labor 
Market for Uber’s Driver Partners in the United States.” 
Industrial Relations Section Working Paper No. 587, 
Princeton University.

Hudnall, David. 2015. “Former KC Uber Driver Organizing 
National Strike Against the Rideshare Company.” The 
Pitch, September 30.

Kennedy, Elizabeth. 2014. “Freedom from Independence: Collective 
Bargaining for Dependent Contractors.” Berkeley Journal of 
Employment and Labor Law 26 (144).

Kleiner, Morris. 2001. “Intensity of Management Resistance: 
Understanding the Decline of Unionization in the Private 
Sector.” Journal of Labor Research 22 (3): 519–40.

Lui, Eric. 2013. “Viewpoint: The Decline of Unions is Your Problem 
Too.” Time, January 29.

McKinsey Global Institute. 2015, June. “Connecting Talent with 
Opportunity in the Digital Age.”

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
(OECD). “Non Regular Employment, Job Security and the 
Labour Market Divide.” http://www.oecd.org/els/emp/
Emo2014-Annex-chapter4.pdf

Rothschild, Michael, and Joseph Stiglitz. 1976. “Equilibrium 
in Competitive insurance Markets: An Essay on the 
Economics of Imperfect Information.” Quarterly Journal of 
Economics 90 (4): 629–49.

Summers, Lawrence. 1989. “Some Simple Economics of Mandated 
Benefits.” American Economic Review Papers and 
Proceedings 79 (2): 177–83.

Taylor, Timothy. 2014. “How Milton Friedman Helped Invent Income 
Tax Withholding.” Conversable Economist, April 12.

Warner, Mark. 2015. “Asking Tough Questions about the Gig 
Economy.” Washington Post, June 18.

Weil, David. 2014. The Fissured Workplace: Why Work Became So 
Bad for So Many and What Can Be Done to Improve It. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Weiler, Paul C. 2009. Governing the Workplace: The Future of Labor 
and Employment Law. Boston, MA: Harvard University 
Press.

Woodbury, Stephen A. 2009. “Unemployment.” In Labor and 
Employment Law and Economics, edited by Kenneth G. 
Dau-Schimdt, Seth D. Harris, and Orly Lobel, 480–516. 
Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing.

References

36  A Proposal for Modernizing Labor Laws for Twenty-First-Century Work: The “Independent Worker”



The Hamilton Project  •  Brookings  3

ADVISORY COUNCIL

GEORGE A. AKERLOF
University Professor
Georgetown University

ROGER C. ALTMAN
Founder & Executive Chairman
Evercore

KAREN ANDERSON
Principal
KLA Strategies

ALAN S. BLINDER
Gordon S. Rentschler Memorial Professor of 
Economics & Public Affairs
Princeton University

JONATHAN COSLET
Senior Partner &  
Chief Investment Officer 
TPG Capital, L.P.

ROBERT CUMBY
Professor of Economics
Georgetown University

STEVEN A. DENNING
Chairman
General Atlantic

JOHN DEUTCH
Institute Professor
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

CHRISTOPHER EDLEY, JR.
The Honorable William H. Orrick, Jr.  
Distinguished Professor; Faculty Director,  
Chief Justice Earl Warren Institute on  
Law & Social Policy
Boalt School of Law 
University of California, Berkeley

BLAIR W. EFFRON
Partner
Centerview Partners LLC

DOUG ELMENDORF
Former Director
Congressional Budget Office

JUDY FEDER
Professor & Former Dean
McCourt School of Public Policy
Georgetown University

ROLAND FRYER
Henry Lee Professor of Economics
Harvard University 

MARK T. GALLOGLY
Cofounder & Managing Principal
Centerbridge Partners

TED GAYER
Vice President &  
Director of Economic Studies 
The Brookings Institution

TIMOTHY GEITHNER
President
Warburg Pincus

RICHARD GEPHARDT
President & Chief Executive Officer
Gephardt Government Affairs 

ROBERT GREENSTEIN
Founder & President
Center on Budget and Policy Priorities 

MICHAEL GREENSTONE
The Milton Friedman Professor in Economics
Director, Energy Policy Institute at Chicago
University Of Chicago

GLENN H. HUTCHINS
Co-Founder 
Silver Lake

JAMES JOHNSON
Chairman
Johnson Capital Partners

LAWRENCE F. KATZ
Elisabeth Allison Professor of Economics
Harvard University

MELISSA S. KEARNEY
Senior Fellow, The Brookings Institution
Professor of Economics  
University of Maryland

LILI LYNTON
Founding Partner
Boulud Restaurant Group

MARK MCKINNON
Former Advisor to George W. Bush
Co-Founder, No Labels

ERIC MINDICH
Chief Executive Officer & Founder 
Eton Park Capital Management

SUZANNE NORA JOHNSON
Former Vice Chairman
Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.

PETER ORSZAG
Vice Chairman of Corporate and  
Investment Banking
Citigroup, Inc.

RICHARD PERRY
Managing Partner &  
Chief Executive Officer
Perry Capital

MEEGHAN PRUNTY 
Senior Advisor
The Hamilton Project

ROBERT D. REISCHAUER
Distinguished Institute Fellow 
& President Emeritus
Urban Institute

ALICE M. RIVLIN
Senior Fellow, The Brookings Institution 
Professor of Public Policy
Georgetown University 

DAVID M. RUBENSTEIN 
Co-Founder &  
Co-Chief Executive Officer
The Carlyle Group

ROBERT E. RUBIN
Co-Chair, Council on Foreign Relations
Former U.S. Treasury Secretary

LESLIE B. SAMUELS
Senior Counsel
Cleary Gottlieb Steen & Hamilton LLP

SHERYL SANDBERG
Chief Operating Officer 
Facebook

RALPH L. SCHLOSSTEIN
President & Chief Executive Officer
Evercore

ERIC SCHMIDT
Executive Chairman 
Alphabet Inc.

ERIC SCHWARTZ
76 West Holdings

THOMAS F. STEYER
Business Leader, Philanthropist &  
Clean Energy Advocate

LAWRENCE SUMMERS 
Charles W. Eliot University Professor 
Harvard University

PETER THIEL
Entrepreneur, Investor & Philanthropist

LAURA D’ANDREA TYSON
Professor of Business Administration 
and Economics; Director, Institute for 
Business & Social Impact
Berkeley-Haas School of Business

DIANE WHITMORE SCHANZENBACH
Director



4  Informing Students about Their College Options: A Proposal for Broadening the Expanding College Opportunities Project

W W W . H A M I L T O N P R O J E C T . O R G

W W W . H A M I L T O N P R O J E C T . O R G

1775 Massachusetts Ave., NW 
Washington, DC 20036

(202) 797-6484

Printed on recycled paper.

Highlights

Seth Harris of Cornell University and Alan Krueger of Princeton University propose the creation of 
a new legal category of workers, to be called “independent workers,” to address the current legal 
uncertainty regarding whether workers in the online gig economy should receive employment 
and tax benefits and protections. Their proposal would allow independent workers to gain access 
to collective bargaining, various forms of insurance, civil rights protections, employer-provided 
benefits, and tax withholding.

The Proposal

Create a New Classification for Independent Workers. Congress and, where necessary, state 
legislatures would pass legislation to establish a new classification for independent workers. In 
doing so, Congress and state legislatures would consider three guiding principles in the new 
worker classification system to recognize that: work hours are difficult or impossible to measure, 
businesses should not organize themselves to fit their workers into one status over another, 
and workers and businesses should maximize the joint benefits of their relationship. The new 
classification would encompass both new types of work, such as jobs in the online gig economy, 
and more-established forms, such as taxi driving.

Assign Benefits and Protections to Independent Workers. Congress would assign new benefits 
and protections to independent workers, following the proposed guiding principles. Benefits such 
as tax withholding and various forms of insurance would be available to independent workers 
without businesses facing full employment classification, while benefits tied to hours such as 
minimum wage and overtime pay would be excluded.

Benefits

This proposal would address the uncertainty that workers and businesses face in the current 
legal environment regarding a range of legal protections and benefits that employees receive. 
Harris and Krueger argue that the proposal would increase efficiency in the labor market, 
enhance worker protections, encourage innovation, and decrease costly legal battles by 
addressing a key deficiency in current employment law.




