












































African Development Bank
Asian Development Bank

European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
Inter-American Development Bank



AfDB, ADB, EBRD, IDB (African Development Bank, Asian 

Development Bank, European Bank for Reconstruction and 

Development, Inter-American Development Bank). 2018. 

The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives.   

Washington, DC. 

Cataloging-in-Publication data provided by the

Inter-American Development Bank 

Felipe Herrera Library 

The future of work: regional perspectives / African Development 

Bank, Asian Development Bank, European Bank for Reconstruction 

and Development, Inter-American Development Bank. p. cm. — 

(IDB Monograph; 605) Includes bibliographic references. 1. Work-

Forecasting. 2. Labor market-Effect of technological innovations 

on. 3. Labor market-Effect of automation on. 4. Employment 

forecasting. I. African Development Bank. II. Asian Development 

Bank. III. European Bank for Reconstruction and Development. 

IV. Inter-American Development Bank. Labor Markets Division. V. 

Inter-American Development Bank. Office of Strategic Planning 

and Development Effectiveness. VI. Serie.IDB-MG-605

Copyright © 2018 African Development Bank, Asian 

Development Bank, European Development Bank for 

Reconstruction, Inter-American Development Bank (jointly 

referred as the “Co-publishers”). 

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons IGO 3.0 

Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives (CC-IGO BY-NC-ND 

3.0 IGO) license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-

nd/3.0/igo/legalcode) and may be reproduced with attribution 

to the Co-publishers and for any non-commercial purpose. No 

derivative work is allowed. Any dispute related to the use of the 

works of the Co-publishers that cannot be settled amicably shall 

be submitted to arbitration pursuant to the UNCITRAL rules. The 

use of the Co-publishers’ names for any purpose other than for 

attribution, and the use of Co-publishers’ logos shall be subject 

to a separate written license agreement between the Co-

publishers and the user and is not authorized as part of this CC-

IGO license. Note that link provided above includes additional 

terms and conditions of the license. 



Terms, names boundaries, colors and denominations used in 

this report or any of its maps to refer to geographical or other 

territories, political and economic groupings and units, do 

not constitute and should not be construed as constituting 

an express or implied position, endorsement, acceptance or 

expression of opinion by the co-publishers or its members 

concerning the status of any country, territory, grouping 

and unit, or delimitation of its borders, or sovereignty. ADB 

recognizes “China” as the People’s Republic of China, “Korea” 

as the Republic of Korea, and “Vietnam” as Viet Nam. In 

addition, ADB recognizes “Russia” as the Russian Federation.

The opinions expressed in this publication are those of 

the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the 

Co-publishers, their Board of Directors, Board of Governors, 

or the countries they represent. ADB does not guarantee the 

accuracy of the data included in this publication and accepts 

no responsibility for any consequence of their use. The mention 

of specific companies or products of manufacturers does 

not imply that they are endorsed or recommended by ADB in 

preference to others of a similar nature that are not mentioned.

Photography

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

© Photography: Shutterstock

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

© Photography: Asian Development Bank.

EUROPEAN BANK FOR 

RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

© Photography: European Bank for Reconstruction 

and Development, Dermot Doorly, iStock Photos.

INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

© Photography: iStock Photos



Acknowledgments
The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives is a joint 

effort of the African Development Bank (AfDB), the 

Asian Development Bank (ADB), the European Bank for 

Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), and the Inter-

American Development Bank (IDB), endorsed by their 

presidents.

The principal authors of each individual chapter are as 

follows:

Chapter 1: Nikola Milushev and Carmen Pagés 

Chapter 2: Kapil Kapoor, Hassanatu Mansaray, Laura 

Sennett, Oscar Pitti Rivera, Antonio Ocana Marin, and the 

African Centre for Economic Transformation

Chapter 3: Bandini Chhichhia, Sergei Guriev, Alexia Latortue, 

Nikola Milushev, Alexander Plekhanov, and Valerijs Rezvijs

Chapter 4: Elisabetta Gentile, Rana Hasan, and Sameer 

Khatiwada

Chapter 5: Dulce Baptista, Mariano Bosch, Manuel García 

Huitron, Daniel Jaar Michea, Carlos Ospino, Carmen Pagés, 

Laura Ripani, and Graciana Rucci

This study was made possible by the leadership and general 

coordination of Kapil Kapoor (AfDB), Jiro Tominaga (ADB), 

Alexia Latortue (EBRD), Carmen Pagés (IDB), and Pablo 

Pereira Dos Santos (IDB). Editorial production of this volume 

was led by Andrés Gómez-Peña and Nancy Morrison. 

Graphic design and layout was led by Lina María Botero in 

collaboration with Carlos Bernal. Marcelo Cabrol, manager 

of the IDB’s Social Sector, and Luis Miguel Castilla, manager 

of the IDB’s Office of Strategic Planning and Development 

Effectiveness, provided valuable guidance and advice 

throughout the life of this project.



Foreword 
vi

Chapter 1 
The Future of Work in Emerging and Developing Economies 

1

Chapter 2
The Future of Work in Africa 

29

Chapter 3 
The Future of Work in Developing Asia 

49

Chapter 4 
The Future of Work in Emerging Europe, Central Asia, 

and Southern and Eastern Mediterranean 
71

Chapter 5 
The Future of Work in Latin America and the Caribbean 

89

Contents



Foreword
The “Future of Work” is currently one of the most 

popular terms searched on Google. Many technological 

breakthroughs are rapidly shifting the frontier between 

activities performed by humans and the ones performed 

by machines, transforming the world of work. 

Many studies and initiatives are examining what 

these changes mean for our work, our incomes, our 

children’s futures, our companies, and our governments. 

Most of them do so from the perspective of advanced 

economies. Much less work has been done from the 

perspective of developing and emerging economies. Yet 

differences in the spread of technology, economic and 

demographic structures, education levels, and migration 

patterns greatly affect the way in which these changes 

might affect developing and emerging countries. 

This study, The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives, 

focuses on the likely repercussions of this major trend 

in developing and emerging economies in Africa; Asia; 

Eastern Europe, Central Asia, and Southern and Eastern 

Mediterranean; and Latin America and the Caribbean. It is a 

joint effort of the four main regional development banks: the 

African Development Bank, the Asian Development Bank, 

the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, 

and the Inter-American Development Bank. 

This study highlights the opportunities that changes 

in the dynamics of work might create for our regions. 

Technological progress could allow the countries we 

work with to grow faster and attain higher standards of 

living more rapidly than ever before. In fact, we argue that 

the biggest risk for many countries would be to miss out 

vi | Foreword



on this revolution. What matters is how well countries 

prepare to take advantage of these changes to maximize 

the opportunities, while addressing the likely risks and 

challenges. Appropriate responses at the level of the 

individual, the enterprise, and the government are needed. 

This study explores some of these responses.

We are delighted to present this report to the policy 

makers, companies, and individuals of our member 

countries. We hope that, armed with the knowledge 

presented here, and with the support of our institutions, 

we can, together, foster a better future of work for all the 

peoples of our regions.

Kapil Kapoor

Director, Strategy and Operational Policies

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

Yasuyuki Sawada

Chief Economist and Director, General Economic 

Research and Regional Cooperation Department

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

Alexia Latortue

Managing Director, Corporate Strategy

EUROPEAN BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION 

AND DEVELOPMENT

Marcelo Cabrol

Manager, Social Sector

INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

 The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | vii



8 | Chapter 1



The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 1 

Chapter 1
The Future of 
Work in Emerging 
and Developing 
Economies

Technological progress provides a golden opportunity for 
emerging and developing economies to grow faster and 
attain higher levels of prosperity in a shorter span of time. 
However, there are fears that technologies could potentially 
displace human labor, widen income inequality, and further 
increase the share of informal or contingent work. While 
anxiety about technological change has existed since the 
dawn of the industrial age, until recently new economic 
activities more than compensated for technology-induced 
unemployment. Current disruptive technology changes, 
however, raise concerns that this time could be different. 



2 | Chapter 1

The Changing Nature of Work
Rapid technological progress increases the potential of boosting economic growth and 

raising prosperity across the world. The confluence and rapid development of a wide range 

of new technologies, such as artificial intelligence, robotics, 3D printing, the Internet of 

Things, biotechnology, and blockchain, is known as the Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR) 

(see Box 1.1) Rapid technological progress can significantly boost economic growth at a time 

when productivity growth has slowed in many parts of the world (McKinsey Global Institute, 

2018). It can yield important efficiency gains within companies. It can also accelerate the 

process of structural transformation by which countries grow by shifting labor from low-

productivity activities, often in agriculture, to higher-productivity activities, mostly in the 

manufacturing and the service sectors. Such growth is essential to provide the resources to 

continue improving economic, social, and environmental outcomes, as well as to speed up 

the convergence of incomes of emerging economies with developed countries.

The impact of technological change on the future of work will differ across 
emerging markets and developing economies depending on demographic 

trends, patterns of international trade, the prevalence of the informal economy, 
and other conditions. Ultimately, how these changes play out and whether the 

benefits in terms of income, health, flexibility, or new jobs will outweigh the costs 
will depend on the policies that countries undertake to take advantage of these 

technologies, mitigate their adverse effects, and share benefits among the whole 
population. Fulfilling the promises of technological change while mitigating 

the associated risks calls for thorough public debate and collective action of 
governments, regulators, the private sector, and international organizations. 



The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 3 

Box 1.1 The Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR)
A number of recent technological breakthroughs—especially in artificial intelligence (AI), 

machine learning, and robotics—are unleashing new capabilities and fundamentally changing 

the nature of work. These new technologies are complementing as well as replacing workers. 

They hold the promise of higher productivity and greater safety. This technological revolution 

is being referred as the Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR). 

The 4IR technologies present challenges and opportunities. The key opportunities 

include improvements in productivity. Consumer surplus (savings) could increase as goods 

are delivered more cheaply. This surplus, in turn, could drive demand for new services and 

thus encourage entrepreneurship (and new jobs). 

On the other hand, 4IR technologies are likely to eliminate many jobs, especially middle-

income jobs, and further entrench inequality by disproportionately rewarding owners of 

capital and skills over owners of labor. The rapid changes that are being driven by these 

technologies are also increasing uncertainty and making it harder for businesses and policy 

makers to plan.

The impact of 4IR technologies has been a subject of study, particularly because of concerns 

about job losses. As noted, 4IR technologies are likely to alter society in various ways:

• 3D printing is pointing to the end of the factory model of production and may herald 

a return to a form of cottage industries seen in the past.

• Industry boundaries are becoming blurred as technologies allow companies to more 

easily venture into other industries. For instance, Google is developing autonomous 

cars while Tesla, a car company, sees itself as an energy company. 

• Traditional notions of work are being rethought, particularly with work being 

increasingly defined by what people do rather than where they do it. For example, 

business will continue to connect and collaborate remotely with freelancers and 

independent professionals through digital talent platforms.

• The digital platform is upending assumptions that have underpinned economic 

policy. The sharing economy is moving from the concept of ownership to concept of 

buying a service. Car companies, for instance, are more unlikely to sell cars in the 

future but rather offer a transport service.a 

a. One car in a sharing 

economy removes 22 

cars from the road—a 

fact based on the current 

ownership model in which 

a car spends 93 percent of 

its lifetime idle.



4 | Chapter 1

However, there are fears that technologies could 

potentially displace human labor, widen income inequality, 

and further increase the share of informal or contingent work. 

News of fully automated stores, warehouses, or automobiles 

that do not require the intervention of humans have ignited 

fears that technology will create mass labor dislocation, 

increase technological unemployment, and continue 

widening inequality and polarizing the labor market into 

good jobs (stable jobs with benefits)—those that develop or 

adopt technology—and precarious jobs. This prospect might 

even be more worrisome for many emerging and developing 

countries where labor forces are rapidly growing in relation 

to the overall population, raising concerns that in the future 

not enough jobs will be created to employ these bulging 

working-age populations. 

Historically, technological progress has not created 

technological unemployment. If history is any guide, new 

technologies have eliminated some jobs and substituted for 

some tasks formerly performed by humans, but they have 

also enabled the creation of many new jobs powered by 

growing incomes and the emergence of new occupations. 

But many people are asking whether this time will be 

different. Because technology is encroaching on many tasks 

that were formerly though to be out of reach of machines, 

and because technological growth could itself be affecting 

the mechanisms by which income growth translates into 

increased demand for human work, history might not 

repeat itself (Brynjolfsonn and McAfee, 2014; Susskind and 

Susskind, 2015). 

Another important question is the extent to which the 

effects of this wave of technological change will differ 

across different regions of the world, which enter this 

period with very different initial conditions. Differences in 

demography, access to broadband, workforce skill levels, or 

the availability of safety nets create important differences in 

the velocity at which technological progress spreads across 

regions as well as its effects on populations. While there 

is growing research about the future of work in developed 

economies, relatively less has been discussed from the 

perspective of developing and emerging countries (Chandy, 

2017). This volume explores the benefits and risks brought 

by this new technological wave from the perspective of 

the member countries of the four multilateral development 

banks spanning Central, Eastern, and South-Eastern Europe, 

Central Asia, and the Southern and Eastern Mediterranean; 

Asia; Africa; and Latin America and the Caribbean. The 

chapters consider the specific interplay of technology, 

demographics, and economic and social policies in these 

regions, and focus on how these forces can shape the future 

of work. 

The New World of Work 
in Historical Context
At least two developments characterize the new world 

of work. First, the confluence of new and rapidly evolving 

technological breakthroughs is increasing the potential for 

automation. Second, the way people are working is also 

rapidly evolving as technology is connecting people to jobs 

and income opportunities in new ways. 

Anxiety about the impact of rapid technological progress 

on work and livelihoods has been a fact of life since the dawn 

of the industrial age. In the early nineteenth century, weaving 

craftsmen in England, the Luddites, set out to break machines 

taking over their jobs. About a decade later, in 1817, David 



The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 5 

Ricardo wrote that the “discovery and use of machinery… will 

be injurious to the laboring class, as some of their number will 

be thrown out of employment, and population will become 

redundant…” His writings sound remarkably current nearly 

two centuries later (Ricardo, 1817). 

A contemporary of Ricardo, Thomas Malthus, sounded the 

alarm on another trend: the demographic pressure on economic 

well-being (Malthus, 1798). Ever since the writings of Malthus 

and Ricardo, the interplay of technology and demography and 

their impact on employment, economic growth, and education 

have been at the forefront of the public debate. 

Successive waves of technological and demographic 

change have led to large-scale, often painful disruptions. 

Yet new technology has always brought about new 

economic activities that more than compensated for the 

lost occupations, on balance (Acemoglu and Restrepo, 

2017). Technological progress has boosted productivity and 

expanded incomes, which in turn have raised the demand 

for goods and services. This, in turn, has created entirely 

new industries and jobs, providing employment for a rapidly 

growing world population and raising average incomes. 

These trends were particularly pronounced and widely 

shared across the social spectrum in the twentieth century, 

when job creation was mostly concentrated in middle-class 

occupations. 

Despite the evidence that in the past technological 

progress has never failed to generate new employment, many 

voice concerns that this time around could be different. The 

sheer pace of technological change allows less time for new 

jobs to emerge and could outpace the ability of large sections 

of the workforce to re-educate and retrain (McKinsey Global 

Institute, 2017a). A large proportion of the new jobs created 

could be in low-pay occupations with no benefits and 

unstable working conditions. In addition, technology itself 

may be affecting the way rising incomes create demand for 

human labor, as machines could increasingly produce the 

excess demand for goods and services caused by rising 

incomes (Susskind and Susskind, 2015). 

Yet, while initial estimates suggested a large potential 

for automation, new estimates are less pessimistic. Initial 

estimates based on the potential of automating occupations 

indicated that a large percentage of jobs could be 

automated in the coming years, given current technologies. 

This methodology indicated that 47 percent of all persons 

employed in the United States were working in jobs that 

could be performed by computers and algorithms within the 

next 10 to 20 years (Frey and Osborne, 2017). Based on the 

same methodology, World Bank estimates suggest an even 

higher potential for automation in developing countries, on 

the order of 60 percent to 70 percent (World Bank, 2016). 

Recent studies however, indicate that such figures may 

overestimate the potential job losses due to automation 

because only certain tasks or activities within an occupation 

are at high risk of automation. Once this is accounted for, 

only a relatively small percentage of jobs (on the order 

of 5 percent to 10 percent) can be fully automated given 

current technologies. Nonetheless, at least 30 percent of 

the activities in another 60 percent of occupations could be 

automated with technologies currently available (McKinsey 

Global Institute, 2017b; Armtz, Gregory, and Zierahn, 2016). 

These figures suggest that while some occupations will 

disappear, many occupations will be largely transformed in 

the coming years. This is a process that has already been 

going on in the past few years.



6 | Chapter 1

The introduction of information and communications 

technologies (ICTs) in developed economies has been 

hollowing out middle-income jobs. Since the early 1990s, 

job creation has been concentrated at the two ends of 

the spectrum: among less-skilled occupations (catering, 

construction, cleaning) that are harder to automate and high-

skilled occupations (including professional services and 

research & development) (Autor and Dorn, 2013). Highly paid 

skilled work in turn raises demand for employment in low-

paid services, reinforcing the polarization of occupations into 

what Goos and Manning (2007) called “lovely” and “lousy” 

jobs.1 In addition, in many cases technological change leads 

to deskilling of occupations long before the occupations 

themselves disappear. In the past, deskilling affected artisans 

such as smiths and tailors as mechanization split more 

complex tasks into a large number of relatively simple ones.2 

More recently, navigation systems have deskilled driving 

while warehouse automation have deskilled jobs in logistics. 

For instance, Amazon warehouses with a high degree of 

automation appear to require workers with less experience 

who are also paid lower wages (The Economist, 2018). There 

is a growing risk that people in basic occupations cannot rely 

on a single quality job with social security and other benefits, 

and will need to take on several small jobs to make ends meet, 

with accompanying anxiety and insecurity.

The new wave of automation could further raise inequality 

because one unit of labor backed by new technologies is 

scalable and can be simultaneously sold an increasingly 

1.  Also see Autor and Dorn (2013).

2.  See, for instance, Goldin and Katz (1998).



The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 7 

Large differences in 
economic structures generate 
large differences in the 
way countries will be or are 
being affected by the Fourth 
Industrial Revolution. 



8 | Chapter 1

large number of times (for example, a song downloaded or a 

piece of software). By contrast, units of labor in non-routine 

manual jobs such as cleaning or catering can be sold only 

once. As a result, pay inequality is expected to continue 

rising. Rising inequality and polarization of jobs creates 

fertile ground for the rise of populism, which could in turn 

undermine economic and democratic institutions, growth, 

and international peace. 

Nonetheless, technology is also bringing countless 

benefits, which may be even larger in the context of emerging 

and developing economies. In addition to faster economic 

growth, rising computing power and the use of big data 

can deliver a tremendous boost to scientific and medical 

research, with the potential to resolve many currently 

intractable health or pollution problems. Related advances 

in biotechnology, health care, and long-term care may help 

mitigate the social and fiscal impact of rapid aging. New 

technologies reduce information asymmetries, which helps 

financial inclusion by providing access to finance for people 

without credit histories.

The development of new technologies can benefit 

workers with a preference or need for flexibility. Technology 

is making it increasingly feasible to decentralize tasks 

from companies directly to people, which they perform as 

freelancers. Unbundling of jobs into sets of smaller tasks 

creates opportunities for workers to enjoy the flexibility of 

freelancing and to top up their incomes. This trend has led to 

the flourishing of the “gig,” “sharing,” or more generally, the 

“platform” economy. Remarkably, Uber, the world’s largest 

taxi company, owns no taxis, and Airbnb, the world’s largest 

accommodation provider, owns no real estate (Brynjolfsson 

and McAfee, 2017). 

New flexible ways of working could benefit groups that 

have been traditionally economically marginalized, such as 

women, young people, and the disabled (OECD, 2017). Young 

people, in particular, are early adopters of new technologies 

and may have a comparative advantage over mid-career 

workers in rapidly evolving technology-intensive industries. 

At the same time, the spread of platform-enabled work 

may create important risks for the welfare state. To the 

extent that most workers in the on-demand and gig economy 

are considered self-employed, this limits their access to 

employer-provided health or pensions, a minimum wage, or 

other labor law protections or unions (Chandy, 2017). 

Ultimately, how these changes play out and whether 

the benefits in terms of incomes, health, flexibility, or new 

jobs will outweigh the costs will depend on the policies 

that countries undertake to take advantages of these 

technologies, attenuate their adverse effects, and share 

benefits among all. The discussion on the role of government 

regarding the future of work is continued in the final sections 

of this chapter. 

The Future of Work: What Is Different in 
Emerging and Developing Countries? 
Technological progress provides a golden opportunity 

for emerging and developing economies to grow faster 

and attain higher levels of prosperity in a shorter span of 

time. While productivity growth in emerging regions has 

been faster than in the developed world (see Figure 1.1), 

technologies to boost productivity are needed to speed up 

growth, particularly in Africa and in Latin America and the 

Caribbean, where productivity growth has been quite low, 

and where much of the growth has been driven by employing 



The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 9 

Source: The Conference Board (2017). 

Note: The index of labor productivity per hour worked is measured in 2016 U.S. dollars (converted to the 2016 price 

level with updated 2011 purchasing power parity). The year 2000 is equal to 100. Developed countries include 

Canada, the high-income countries of Asia and the Pacific, the United States, and Western Europe. The other four 

regions include the developing member economies of each regional development bank: the African Development 

Bank, the Asian Development Bank, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), and the Inter-

American Development Bank. 

Asia

Africa

Developed 
countries

EBRD countries

Latin America 
and the Caribbean

Figure 1.1 Labor Productivity Growth across Regions

While productivity growth in emerging regions has been faster than 

in the developed world, it has been uneven across regions. 





The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 11 

a higher percentage of the labor force, rather than by 

increasing the productivity of each worker. 

Large differences in economic structures generate 

large differences in the way countries are being affected 

by technological progress. Technological developments in 

agriculture, for example, could be particularly relevant in 

Developing Asia and Africa because agriculture accounts for 

a larger percentage of employment. In Africa, 51 percent of 

workers are in agriculture, while the share in Asia is 32 percent. 

In the other regions, the percentage of agriculture is much 

lower: only 16 percent in Latin America and the Caribbean 

and 10 percent in the developing member economies of the 

European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD). 

Developments in manufacturing, such as robotics and 3D 

printing, are more important for EBRD regions3 because they 

have a large percentage of employment in manufacturing 

(30 percent). Finally, developments in the service sector 

will be particularly relevant for the EBRD regions and Latin 

America and the Caribbean, where these sectors account for 

close to 60 percent of total employment—not too far from 

the 70 percent share in the developed world.

Technological progress can deliver rapid growth if it 

accelerates structural transformation. While in developed 

economies the worst jobs are found in the low-productivity 

service sector, in many parts of the developing world the 

worst jobs are found in agriculture. Many agricultural 

workers live in subsistence conditions unable to make ends 

meet (see Chapter 3 on Developing Asia). New developments 

in precision agriculture, based on automation and the use 

of the Internet of Things, offer great potential for increasing 

productivity in agriculture and speeding up structural 

transformation in Africa and many countries in Asia. The 

deployment of sophisticated robots in manufacturing will 

increase productivity in the manufacturing sector, but it 

needs to go hand in hand with investments to increase the 

productivity of service sectors. Otherwise, there is risk of 

shifting workers to low-productivity service jobs, causing 

the reverse effect: a slowdown of overall productivity 

growth. Services enabled by digital technology, such as 

IT (information technology) services, can expand without 

being constrained by local income, but are typically skill 

intensive. As discussed later in this chapter, shifting a higher 

percentage of employment to these sectors will require 

complementary investments in education and training. 

Broadband coverage—a prerequisite for the deployment 

of digital technologies—may constrain the pace of automation 

in developing and emerging countries. While there has 

been a rapid convergence in the spread of mobile phones 

lines across the world, there are still marked differences in 

broadband subscriptions (Figure 1.2). In 2016, the number 

of mobile cellular subscriptions per 100 people was at or 

above 100 in all regions except Africa, where it reached 

more than 80 subscriptions per 100 people, indicating the 

patterns of a mature technology. On the other hand, the 

spread of broadband is quite uneven and the differences 

between developed countries and the rest of the world are 

large. Moreover, so far there is no evidence that these gaps 

are closing. The EBRD countries have the highest number of 

subscriptions after the developed world, with more than 20 

subscriptions per 100 people, followed by Latin America and 

3. The regions where the EBRD works span Central, Eastern and South-Eastern Europe, the Southern and Eastern Mediterranean, Central Asia, and Mongolia. 



12 | Chapter 1

Figure 1.2 Mobile and Fixed Broadband Subscriptions by Region

Despite a rapid convergence in the spread of mobile phones lines across the world, 

there are still marked differences in broadband subscriptions.

a. Mobile cellular subscriptions (per 100 people)

the Caribbean, with 10. Given this base, the consequences, 

positive and adverse, of technological progress are likely be 

felt first in many EBRD countries and in Latin America and 

the Caribbean, and later in Asia and Africa. 

Initial estimates indicated a higher potential for 

automation in developing and emerging economies, but 

more recent estimates show smaller differences and no 

clear patterns by income level. Initial estimates of the 

potential for automation showed that developing economies 

have a higher potential of automation because they are 

more specialized in low-wage, low-skilled occupations, 

which given current technology are easier to automate. 

World Bank estimates showed the highest potential of 

automation in the Asian and African region, with 73 percent 

and 71 percent of the jobs susceptible to being automated, 

respectably (Table 1.1) (World Bank, 2016). New estimates 

Developed 
countries



The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 13 

Source: World Bank (2018). 

Note: Developed countries include Canada, the high-income countries of Asia and Pacific, the United States, and Western Europe. The other four regions 

include the developing member economies of each regional development bank: the African Development Bank, the Asian Development Bank, the European 

Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), and the Inter-American Development Bank.

b. Fixed broadband subscriptions (per 100 people)

however, indicate much smaller differences across regions, 

and no pattern based on income. For example, according 

to McKinsey (2017a), both developed economies and Africa 

have the same potential for automation. It should also be 

stressed that while some of the initial numbers showed 

that automation could potentially destroy more than half of 

existing jobs, new estimates based on tasks indicate that 

only 8 percent of the jobs in EBRD countries and 9 percent in 

developed economies can have more than 70 percent of their 

tasks automated.

Differences in the skill base across regions alter the 

incentives to automate and the potential to create new 

jobs and occupations. New technologies are increasing the 

demand for skills complementary to technology, including 

digital skills and high-level cognitive skills (such as creative 

thinking, the ability to learn, and problem resolution), as well 

Developed 
countries



14 | Chapter 1

Region
Approach

Occupation Task Activities

Africa 0.71 0.48

Developing Asia 0.73 0.51

Developed countries 0.48 0.09 0.48

EBRD countries 0.60 0.08 0.50

Latin America and the Caribbean 0.67 0.51

While initial estimates predicted great risks of joblessness through automation, more recent estimates 

and a finer break-down by task and activity suggest that the risk has been overstated.

as soft skills. At the same time, technological progress is 

reducing the demand for routine-based work. This implies 

that limitations in the skill base of the population may 

constrain technology adoption or the creation of new jobs. 

There are significant differences in the skills base of the 

workforce. On average, the EBRD countries have the highest 

skills levels, followed by Developing Asia, while Latin America 

and the Caribbean and Africa have the lowest, according to 

the Human Capital Index of the World Economic Forum (WEF, 

2017). The ranking is a little different if rather than using 

the aggregate Human Capital Index, skills are measured 

Sources: For occupation, World Bank (2016); for task, Armtz, Gregory, and Ziehran (2016); for activities, McKinsey 

Global Institute (2018).

Note: EBRD = European Bank for Reconstruction and Development.

using the Human Capital Capacity Index, which measures 

the percentage of the workforce that has attained tertiary, 

secondary, and primary education, as well as the percentage 

that has literacy and numeracy skills (Figure 1.3). 

Cost pressures to automate also differ substantially 

across regions. Countries with faster wage growth and/

or shrinking working-age populations in relation to the 

overall population will experience greater incentives to 

automate.4 Developed and EBRD countries, on average, 

face rapid aging of their labor forces and declining shares 

of the working-age population (Figure 1.4). The share of 

Table 1.1 The Risk of Automation by Region

4.  See, for example, Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017) and Acemoglu and Restrepo (forthcoming).



The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 15 

Source: WEF (2017). 

Note: Developed countries include Canada, the high-income countries of Asia and the Pacific, the United 

States, and Western Europe. The other four regions include the developing member economies of each regional 

development bank: the African Development Bank, the Asian Development Bank, the European Bank for 

Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), and the Inter-American Development Bank.

EBDR countries and Developing Asia have the highest investments among developing countries. 

Latin America and the Caribbean and Africa have the lowest.

Figure 1.3 Investments in Human Capital by Region

Human Capital Index
Capacity
Development
Know-How20

70

80

60

50

40

30

10

0

AfricaAsiaDeveloped 
Countries

EBRD countries Latin America and 
the Caribbean

In
de

x 
(0

-1
00

 s
ca

le
)



16 | Chapter 1

the working-age populations will decline slightly in Latin 

America and the Caribbean and Asia, starting in 2025 in 

Latin America and the Caribbean and a bit later in the 

average country of Developing Asia. By contrast, Africa 

will continue experiencing a demographic boon, with 

an increasing share of its population in the labor force, 

Source: ILO (2017).

Note: Developed countries include Canada, the high-income countries of Asia and the Pacific, the United States, and Western Europe. The other four 

regions include the developing member economies of each regional development bank: the African Development Bank, the Asian Development Bank, the 

European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), and the Inter-American Development Bank.

growing from 57 percent to 67 percent from 2015 to 2050. 

These figures may be altered by migration patterns. 

While in developed countries the effects of automation 

will be driven by production costs, in developing and emerging 

countries they may result from changing international trade 

patterns. To the extent that automation can increase the 

Figure 1.4 Evolution of the Working-Age Population as a Percentage of Total Population
The working-age population will decline slightly in Asia and Latin America and the Caribbean, decrease 

more sharply in EBRD countries, and increase in Africa. 





18 | Chapter 1

competitive advantage of producing in developed countries, 

the offshoring trend that has occurred since the 1980s may 

come to a halt and may even be reversed as a higher share 

of production takes place in developed countries. Such 

adverse effects could be potentially more important for Asia 

and EBRD countries because of their higher specialization in 

the production of industrial goods. The study for Developing 

Asia (Chapter 3 in this volume), shows that this effect is 

likely to be more than compensated by the growing demand 

for labor caused by rising income, leading to a net expansion 

in employment.

The welfare costs of automation may be higher in 

developing and emerging economies because their safety 

nets are less developed than in higher-income economies. The 

costs of job dislocation are higher for workers without access to 

unemployment insurance or unemployment assistance. While 

comparable data for unemployment protection across country 

income groups do not exist, unemployment is usually within 

the risks covered by social security. However, social security 

coverage is typically low in emerging and developing regions. 

Data from the International Labour Organization indicate that 

while more than 65 percent of people in the labor force are 

contributing to social security in developed countries, only 

between 36 percent and 48 percent do so in the EBRD regions, 

30 percent in Latin America and the Caribbean, 17 percent in 

Asia and the Pacific, and 9.6 percent in Africa.5 

The potential adverse effects of automation may be at 

least partially outweighed by the emergence of technology-

5.  World Social Security Protection Report data, 2017–19. http://www.social-protection.org/gimi/gess/OldAge.action.

6.  ILO (2018). Figures include own-account work and family workers. 

enabled job intermediation platforms, which bring new 

opportunities to connect people to global digital labor 

markets and to opportunities to generate income. The 

McKinsey Global Institute (2015) estimates that by 2025 

digital online platforms could increase global GDP by 

$2.7 trillion through three effects: improved productivity; 

greater employment; and higher labor market participation 

(through work performed both by currently inactive people 

and increased work hours of current part-time workers). 

Moreover, up to 540 million people could benefit from online 

platforms by 2025. The spread of platform work can bring 

substantive benefits if it allows people to tap into digital 

global labor markets, without the need to migrate to other 

countries. The growth of a myriad of platforms that offer 

work, per project or task, that can be developed remotely, 

even from home, increases opportunities for workers in 

locations where broadband connections are available but 

there are no jobs. For some time, participating in these 

global markets may substantially increase the returns to 

digital, creative, or other skills that can be sold remotely, vis-

à-vis the local market. However, over the years, as the global 

competition for that type of work increases, wages may be 

auctioned down.

Platform technologies can raise the productivity of the 

large informal sectors. Self-employment accounts for more 

than 76 percent of employment in the developing world and 

46 percent in emerging economies.6 This employment is 

often characterized as low pay, low productivity, although 

http://www.social-protection.org/gimi/gess/OldAge.action


The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 19 

7.  See, for example, Binelli (2016) for Mexico; and Bargain and Kwenda (2011) for Mexico, Brazil, and South Africa. 

there is a large dispersion of incomes within this sector.7 

Intermediation platforms such as Uber have the potential of 

increasing productivity in the own-account sector. Platforms 

allow workers to connect with demand more efficiently and 

reduce the time in which a person is searching for clients 

and is not generating income (Cramer and Krueger, 2016). 

They can also create economies of scale and scope that 

further boost productivity. 

But platform-enabled work may further compromise 

access to social insurance. In many countries, self-employed 

workers are not required to contribute to social security 

and rarely do so voluntarily. In others, they are required to 

contribute by law, but the level of enforcement is minimal. To 

the extent that platforms increase labor decentralization and 

increase the ranks of self-employment, health and pensions 

coverage may decline for a growing number of people. The 

International Labor Organization estimates that the number 

of self-employed workers will increase in 2018 and 2019 by 

17 million per year (ILO, 2018). 

How Can Policy Shape the Future of Work 
in Emerging and Developing Countries? 
Developing adequate policy responses to the challenges 

posed by the future of work requires a rational assessment 

of the related opportunities and risks, spirited public 

debate, and increased preparedness among policymakers 

and companies. Adaptation to past waves of technological 

progress has always depended on effective policy responses. 

Fulfilling the promises of technological change while 

mitigating the associated risks calls for thorough public 

debate and collective action of governments, regulators, the 

private sector, and international organizations, including 

the multilateral development banks (see Box 1.2 on the 

role multilateral development banks can play to help shape 

the future of work). The greatest risk that emerging and 

developing countries face is missing the opportunity 

presented by this technological revolution. Therefore, ways 

to enable and accelerate the adoption of technology while 

seeking to mitigate its potential adverse effects on people’s 

jobs and incomes are needed. 

Facilitating Workers’ Transitions to New Jobs 

As the wave of structural change gathers speed, many 

workers will have to find new jobs. Supporting workers in this 

transition will be essential to ensure that affected workers 

attain higher incomes and better jobs. To do so, countries can 

build on the enormous potential of digital technologies and 

platforms to connect workers and jobs. A growing number 

of global and local companies are already operating in this 

space, but often they are not catering to the most vulnerable 

workers. Countries can improve the supply of services by 

contracting out with private providers or improving public labor 

intermediation systems and platforms. This is particularly 

important because these services have the potential of 

reaching all workers independently of whether they work in 

the formal or the informal labor markets and because labor 

market intermediation services are the most cost-effective 

active labor market policies (Card, Kluve, and Weber, 2015). 



20 | Chapter 1

Box 1.2 The Role of Multilateral Development Banks in Shaping 
the Future of Work
The multilateral development banks (MDBs) can play an important role to help shape the 

future of work. MDBs can support member countries’ responses to demographic trends 

and changes in technology by being a repository for and a laboratory of initiatives that 

can help countries capitalize on new technologies and mitigate their adverse effects. The 

MDBs’ geographic reach and their broad stakeholder base allow them to test and incubate 

novel ideas, thereby building up political capital and expertise that can be deployed for more 

difficult reforms. MDBs can also support steps to make pensions and universal basic income 

schemes more portable across borders (particularly in the case of integrated labor markets 

such as those in the European Union); increase access to globally competitive education 

or promote cross-border skills certification; and enable lower-income countries to benefit 

more fully from global technological advances in taxation, data management, cyber security, 

and data protection. One final area in which MDBs can also play an important role is 

facilitating regional and global coordination in areas such as tax and competition policy, 

where the changing nature of jobs makes such a response vital to take advantage of the new 

opportunities. 



The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 21 

Therefore, they constitute a sensible first line of response 

in countries with high levels of informality and scarcity of 

resources. Transitions often involve people migrating from 

rural to urban areas or across borders. Providing migration 

assistance is an important component of this support. 

Investing in Job-Readiness 
for a New World of Work 
Returns on life-long learning are likely to rise. Throughout 

history, education and technological progress have been 

closely matched (Goldin and Katz, 2010). Electrification 

created demand for jobs with cognitive/computational 

skills, leading to longer years of education. Workers could 

often rely on the acquired skills accumulated through a 

one-off investment throughout their careers. In recent 

years, however, demand for basic cognitive skills has been 

declining even as the supply of education has continued 

to increase (Beaudry, Green, and Sand, 2016). Initially, 

automation focused primarily on routine cognitive tasks 

(such as clerical work, bookkeeping and basic paralegal 

work reporting). Tasks that appear to be harder to 

automate broadly fall into three categories: perception and 

manipulation tasks, creative intelligence tasks, and social 

intelligence tasks (Frey and Osborne, 2017). Yet even in 

these domains, artificial intelligence (AI) has been making 

rapid advances (Brynjolfsson and McAfee, 2017). The exact 

path of AI development is notoriously hard to predict. But it 

is reasonable to assume that to stay ahead of the machines, 

humans will also need to keep continuously learning to 

solve new, increasingly complex problems, likely involving 

emotional intelligence, complex human interactions (“soft 

skills”), and creativity. The basic education qualifications 

need to be geared increasingly toward helping individuals 

learn how to learn and enhance their soft skills, rather than 

providing them with specific technical skills. Life-long 

learning will be required to keep up with change and acquire 

specialized skills.

The onus is on various stakeholders to maximize equality 

of opportunity in terms of access to education and labor 

markets, as well as promote continuous mid-career learning 

opportunities to those seeking them. In addition, special 

programs for youth and adults with insufficient foundational 

skills will be required so they are not left behind. Solutions 

may involve greater use of publicly backed education 

and training, with employers playing a leading role in the 

curriculum design of training and retraining programs. MDBs 

have a role to play in strengthening partnerships between 

policymakers and employers to jointly identify and address 

challenges in the area of education in life-long learning. 

The increased funding required to run such programs could 

partly come in the form of contributions from companies 

or loans with income-contingent repayment over the long 

term. Advances in technology should reduce the cost 

and complexity of administering such schemes. Quality 

assurance mechanisms will need to be strengthened in 

many countries so better results in terms of learning can 

be achieved. Finally, educational and training systems will 

need to develop pathways to ensure flexible and continuous 

life-long learning trajectories. Retraining and upskilling 

for adults will need to be flexible and compatible with full-

time work. Technology can be part of the solution. Online 

learning, possibly enhanced by artificial intelligence, offers 

the promise of providing custom-tailored, flexible courses. 

In addition, better information and monitoring mechanisms 





The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 23 

can create stronger incentives to raise the quality of training 

programs through transparent systems of evaluation and 

program ratings. Moreover, skills development systems 

can build on big data to detect the skills requirements of 

markets and provide instant feedback information to build 

relevant curricula.

Strengthening Social Protection 

The rise of the “gig economy” may require rethinking the 

provision of health care, pensions, and social protection, 

as saving for old age has traditionally been viewed as the 

responsibility of employers (Tyson and Mendonca, 2015). 

While new platforms give workers greater flexibility and 

foster versatility in terms of skills, in the absence of strong 

social safety nets they also create anxiety and may take a 

toll on individuals’ subjective well-being. 

Elements of the solution could include full portability 

of pensions across employers and self-employment, 

expansion of health care coverage, policies to support 

greater labor force participation among older workers, steps 

to ensure that gig-economy jobs are created in the formal 

sector, and introduction of some form of universal basic 

income as a means of counteracting the impact of more 

flexible labor markets and reduced job security on individual 

income paths.8 

Creating Additional Fiscal Space 

and Redistributing Income

New technologies can be used to help create additional 

fiscal space for these policies, for instance through greater 

transparency of (cashless) payments (Rogoff, 2016), 

strengthened tax administration, and seamless exchange of 

information to fight tax evasion. 

In addition, tax policies should seek to find effective 

and efficient ways to redistribute income. Taxes on robots 

have been proposed as one solution to the problem. While 

they may create inefficiencies in the production of goods 

and services, having a positive tax on robots may be an 

optimal way to redistribute incomes under certain scenarios 

(Guerreiro, Rebelo, and Teles, 2018). More broadly, tax policy 

has traditionally favored innovation and investment. This has 

helped governments promote economies’ competitiveness 

and boost productivity growth, but has also provided an 

implicit subsidy for job automation. Equality and fairness 

considerations may call for the opposite approach—

phasing out subsidies for investment and implicit or explicit 

subsidization of jobs at risk of automation through lower 

taxes on labor and tax incentives for schemes enhancing 

human capital. The right policy mix, however, will strongly 

depend on country characteristics and preferences on 

growth and redistribution.

8.  See Van Parijs and Vanderborght (2017) and OECD (2017). 



24 | Chapter 1

Two other important redistributive tools to be assessed 

in this context are negative income taxes (NIT) and universal 

lump-sum transfers to all individuals financed through 

progressive income tax, also often called universal basic 

income (UBI).9

Conclusion 
Technology affects the workplace in a profound way, which 

necessitates suitable policy responses. The previous wave 

of technological change catalysed the creation of modern 

education systems, anti-trust regulation, and the welfare 

state. Today, technological change automates jobs, gives 

rise to the platform economy, and erodes medium-skilled 

occupations created by the earlier wave of technological 

change. This puts pressure on education, competition 

policy, and social safety nets. As before, economic and 

social policy need to respond. 

The policy responses depend on a country’s individual 

circumstances. On the other hand, such policy responses 

need to be more global and more coordinated than before—

and here MDBs have a unique role to play, along with 

policymakers and the private sector, together shaping the 

future of work. 

9.  In a tax-benefit scheme with a progressive tax system, NIT and UBI can yield the same distributive outcomes and the same marginal and average tax 

rates (Tondani, 2009, 248). 



The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 25 

Fulfilling the promises of 
technological change while 
mitigating the associated 
risks calls for thorough public 
debate and collective action 
of governments, regulators, 
the private sector, and 
international organizations, 
including the multilateral 
development banks.



26 | Chapter 1

References

Acemoglu, D., and P. Restrepo. 2017. Secular Stagnation? The Effect 

of Aging on Economic Growth in the Age of Automation. American 

Economic Review 107 (5): 174–79.

---------. Forthcoming. The Race between Man and Machine: 

Implications of Technology for Growth, Factor Shares and 

Employment. American Economic Review.

Autor, D. H., and D. Dorn. 2013. The Growth of Low-Skill Service Jobs 

and the Polarization of the US Labor Market. American Economic 

Review 103 (5): 1553–97.

Bargain, O., and P. Kwenda. 2011. “Earning Structures, Informal 

Employment, and Self-Employment: New Evidence from Brazil, 

Mexico and South Africa.” Review of Income and Wealth 57 

(Special Issue, May): S100–S122.

Beaudry, P., D. Green, and B. M. Sand. 2016. The Great Reversal in the 

Demand for Skill and Cognitive Tasks. Journal of Labor Economics 

34 (S1, Part 2, January). 

Binelli, C. 2016. Wage Inequality and Informality: Evidence from 

Mexico. IZA Journal of Labor and Development 5 (5): 1–18.

Brynjolfsson, E., and A. McAfee. 2014. The Second Machine Age: 

Work, Progress and Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies. 

New York: W. W. Norton Company. 

Card, D., J. Kluve, and A. Weber. 2015. What Works? A Meta-Analysis 

of Recent Active Labor Market Program Evaluations. National 

Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Chandy, L. 2017. The Future of Work in the Developing World. 

Brookings Institution, Washington, DC. https://www.brookings.

edu/research/the-future-of-work-in-the-developing-world/

Conference Board, The. 2017. The Conference Board Total Economy 

DatabaseTM (Adjusted Version), November.

Cramer, J., and A. Krueger. 2016. Disruptive Change in the Taxi 

Business: The Case of Uber. NBER Working Paper 22083, National 

Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. 

Economist, The. 2018. What Amazon Does to Wages: Is the World’s 

Largest Online Retailer Underpaying its Employees? January 18. 

Frey, C. B., and M. A. Osborne. 2017 The Future of Employment: 

How Susceptible Are Jobs to Computerisation? Technological 

Forecasting and Social Change 114 (C): 254–80.

Goldin, C., and L. F. Katz. 1998. The Origins of Technology-Skill 

Complementarity. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 113 (3, 

August 1): 693–732.

---------. 2010. The Race between Education and Technology. 

Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 

Goos, M., and A. Manning. 2007. Lousy and Lovely Jobs: The Rising 

Polarization of Work in Britain Review of Economics and Statistics 

89 (1, February): 118–133.

Guerreiro, J., S. Rebelo, and P. Teles. 2018. Should Robots Be 

Taxed? NBER Working Paper 23806 (issued September 2017, 

revised January 2018), National Bureau of Economic Research, 

Cambridge, MA. 

ILO (International Labour Organization). 2017. Labour Force 

Estimates and Projections. ILOSTAT. www.ilo.org/ilostat. 

(accessed March 2018).

---------. 2018. World Employment Social Outlook: Trends 2018. 

Geneva: International Labour Office.

https://www.brookings.edu/research/the-future-of-work-in-the-developing-world/
https://www.brookings.edu/research/the-future-of-work-in-the-developing-world/
http://www.ilo.org/ilostat/faces/wcnav_defaultSelection;ILOSTATCOOKIE=KcvRaKskF3EXdQPJFnRXUxyg1Y7TawadmP2Du1WxDD-SKSfct4Wo!1506268203?_afrLoop=2478529053586509&_afrWindowMode=0&_afrWindowId=null#!%40%40%3F_afrWindowId%3Dnull%26_afrLoop%3D2478529053586509%26_afrWindowMode%3D0%26_adf.ctrl-state%3D13y6dm2sl4_4


The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 27 

Malthus, T. 1798. An Essay on the Principle of Population. London: J. 

Johnson.

McKinsey Global Institute. 2015. A Labor Market that Works: 

Connecting Talent with Opportunity in the Digital Age. McKinsey 

Global Institute, June.

---------. 2017a. A Future that Works: Automation, Employment, and 

Productivity. McKinsey Global Institute, January.

---------. 2017b. Jobs Lost, Jobs Gained: Workforce Transitions in a 

Time of Automation. McKinsey Global Institute, December. 

---------. 2018. Solving the Productivity Puzzle: The Role of Demand 

and the Promise of Digitalization. McKinsey Global Institute, 

February.

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). 

2017. Going Digital: The Future of Work for Women. Paris: OECD. 

Ricardo, D. 1817. On the Principles of Political Economy and Taxation 

(1st edition). London: John Murray.

Rogoff. K. 2016. The Curse of Cash. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton 

University Press.

Susskind, R., and D. Susskind. 2015. The Future of Professions: How 

Technology Will Transform the Work of Human Experts. Oxford 

University Press. 

Tondani, D. 2009. Universal Basic Income and Negative Income Tax: 

Two Different Ways of Thinking Redistribution. The Journal of 

Socio-Economics 38 (2): 246–55.

Tyson, L., and L. Mendonca. 2015. Worker Protection in the Gig 

Economy. https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/

employee-protection-gig-economy-by-laura-tyson-and-lenny-

mendonca-2015-11?barrier=accessreg (November 28). 

Van Parijs Ph. and Y. Vanderborght. 2017. Basic Income: A Radical 

Proposal for a Free Society and a Sane Economy. Cambridge, MA: 

Harvard University Press. 

WEF (World Economic Forum). 2017. The Human Capital Report 2017: 

Preparing People for the Future of Work. World Economic Forum.

World Bank. 2016. Digital Dividends. World Development Report 2016. 

Washington, DC: World Bank. 

---------. 2018. World Development Indicators. http://databank.

worldbank.org/ (accessed March 2018). 

https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/employee-protection-gig-economy-by-laura-tyson-and-lenny-mendonca-2015-11?barrier=accessreg
https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/employee-protection-gig-economy-by-laura-tyson-and-lenny-mendonca-2015-11?barrier=accessreg
https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/employee-protection-gig-economy-by-laura-tyson-and-lenny-mendonca-2015-11?barrier=accessreg
http://databank.worldbank.org/
http://databank.worldbank.org/


28 | Chapter 2



The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 29 

Chapter 2
The Future of 
Work in Africa

Economic transformation can increase productivity and 
unleash more dynamic sectors in Africa that can create 
and sustain jobs (absorb labor). Some transformation 
policies that show good promise in Africa are agriculture-
driven transformation, local content and local participation, 
modernizing the services sector, export-oriented 
manufacturing, and enhancing infrastructure.

Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR) technologies will play 
an increasingly important role in Africa’s economic 
transformation in these areas. Africa is already the world’s 
second-largest mobile phone market, and the pool of 
mostly young, successful entrepreneurs using these 
technologies is growing. Yet while Africa will surely face 
the disruptions—for better or worse—associated with 4IR, 
the region currently is ill-prepared to take advantage of the 
unique opportunities that will come with those challenges. 

Across the region, employers identify inadequately skilled 
workers as a major constraint to their businesses. 



30 | Chapter 2

Background and Context
Providing decent jobs is the most assured pathway out of poverty. However, in Africa, job growth 

lags economic growth. Annual growth rates of 5.5 percent in GDP yielded 3.1 percent in job growth 

during 2000-08, and even less during 2009-14 (4.5 percent and 2.8 percent, respectively). Crucially, 

some 90 percent of the jobs created were in the low-productvity informal sector (Benjamin and 

Mbaye, 2014). Unnemployment is high and decent jobs are scarce. About 70 percent of workers 

are in highly vulnerable jobs and almost two-thirds are working poor (see Table 2.1). 

Labor indicators 2000-07 2008-13 2014 2015 2016 2017

Labor force participation 69.8 69.9 70 70.2 70.3 70.4

Unemployment rate 8.1 7.6 7.3 7.4 7.5 7.5

Employment growth 3.0 3.0 3.4 3.0 3.0 3.1

Vulnerable employment 72.9 71.4 69.8 69.9 69.7 69.6

Extreme working poverty 
(less than $1.90 per day) 49.3 39 35.2 34.3 33.1 31.7

Working poverty 
(between $1.90 and $3.10 per day) 23.8 27.7 29.6 29.7 30 30.4

Productivity growth 2.9 1.8 1.5 0.5 1.2 1.7

Africa is characterized by high levels of working poverty and vulnerable employment, 

while job creation lags behind economic growth. 

Table 2.1 Labor Market Indicators (percent)

Source: ILO (2018).

Note: Vulnerable employment refers to the sum of the employment status groups of own account workers and 

contributing family workers. They are less likely to have formal work arrangements and are therefore more likely 

to lack decent working conditions, adequate social security and “voice” through effective representation by trade 

unions and similar organizations. Vulnerable employment is often characterized by inadequate earnings, low 

productivity and difficult conditions of work that undermine workers’ fundamental rights.

 Job creation and growth strategies need to be revisited so that they can address 
the opportunities and challenges presented by 4IR. Africa especially needs to 

address the problem of youth unemployment.



The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 31 

1.  The values range from 0.16 to 1.64 for 47 countries studied. Eighteen had elasticity below 0.41, twenty had values between 0.41 and 1.00, and nine had 

a value greater than 1.00 (AfDB, 2017).

2.  Young people between the ages of 15 and 25 (the United Nations definition of youth) make up 19 percent of the population.

3.  In 2016, youth unemployment in North Africa was more than three times higher than adult unemployment (AfDB, 2018).

The key driver of this situation is the structure of Africa’s 

economies. They are generally highly dependent on raw 

commodity exports, and thus growth may largely reflect the 

movement of commodity prices. African economies are also 

characterized by large informal sectors and a small formal 

sector. The informal sector is more dynamic in terms of 

employment, but productivity and wages are low. Inequality 

has also been growing, with the Gini coefficient rising from 

0.52 in 1993 to 0.56 in 2008, underscoring that growth is 

not widely shared. Some key features of the employment 

landscape are: 

• Low employment elasticity. The jobless growth 

phenomenon in Africa is reflected in very low employment 

elasticity. Every percentage point of economic growth 

during 2000-14 yielded employment growth of only 0.41 

percentage point (AfDB, 2018).1 

• Preponderance of agricultural and informal jobs. Jobs 

are largely agricultural and largely informal. Productivity 

and wages are low. Under-employment is high, ranging 

from 37 percent to 67 percent by country, resulting in a 

high proportion of working poor. Workers in the informal 

sector can earn up to six times less than workers in the 

formal sector (Bhorat and Tarp, 2016, cited in AfDB, 2017).

• Gender and age discrimination. The employment 

situation has a disproportionately negative impact on 

women and youth. Three-quarters of employed women 

in Sub-Saharan Africa are in informal employment, 

compared to 61 percent of men, the African 

Development Bank (2017) estimates. Underemployment 

is more common among women (AfDB, 2017). Gender 

differences tend to be more pronounced in countries 

with high levels of youth unemployment (AfDB, 2015). 

The Youth Unemployment Challenge 
Africa’s employment challenge is essentially a youth 

employment challenge.2 Of the 73 million jobs created 

between 2000 and 2008, only 22 percent were filled by 

youth (AfDB, 2017). The rate of unemployment among youth 

is estimated to be double that of adults in most African 

countries (AfDB, 2017).3 About 40 percent of youth have no 

job security or any benefits whatsoever and about half are 

working poor. Lowering the youth unemployment rate to 

that of adults would lead to an increase in Africa’s GDP of 

between 10 percent and 20 percent (AfDB, 2015). 

The poor jobs situation for Africa’s youth is due to three 

main factors. First, the pace of expansion in job growth in 

Africa’s formal sector has not matched the pace of graduation 

from secondary and tertiary institutions. Each year, 10 million 



32 | Chapter 2

4.  In Tunisia, the 2007 unemployment rate for university graduates was 40 percent, almost twice the 24 percent rate for non-graduates (AfDB, 2015). 

5.  Observers have noted that high unemployment is not enough by itself to lead to an uprising; additional compounding factors tend to be present. For 

example, in North Africa’s uprising, the compounding factors were a sense of social injustice and the need for dignity (UNESCO, 2011).

to 12 million youths, mostly educated, enter the workforce, yet 

only 3 million formal jobs are created annually (AfDB, 2017). 

Second, many youths are ill-prepared to fill the few 

openings because they often do not have the skills required 

by employers (AfDB, 2015) due either to the poor quality of 

their education or to specialization in subject areas (such as 

arts and humanities) other than those that employers demand 

(such as science, technology, and mathematics—STEM). Third, 

youth do not have the social capital, networks, and experience 

to compete with adults in the labor market (AfDB, 2015). 

High youth unemployment is already creating new 

challenges at home and abroad. Forty percent of youths 

joining the ranks of rebel and terror groups cite the lack of 

economic opportunity as the key motivation (AfDB, 2017). 

Many youths are also leaving their home countries to search 

for jobs (see Box 2.1). Much of this immigration is illegal, 

aided by the emergence of criminal networks smuggling 

people, especially to Europe. This is a particularly dangerous 

option for the young people who suffer from predation and 

other dangers. Over 3,500 people, many of them young, 

died in the Mediterranean in 2015 while trying to make the 

perilous journey (AfDB, 2015).

The challenge will become even bigger; Africa’s youth 

population is expected to double to over 830 million by 2050. 

This could be a population boon if these young people are 

equipped with appropriate education and training in the 

context of favorable economic policies (Bloom, Canning, 

and Sevilla, 2003). It can also be a population bomb. 

An estimated 15 million to 20 million increasingly well-

educated young people are expected to join the African 

workforce every year for the next three decades (WEF, 2017). 

If youth unemployment rates remain unchanged, nearly 50 

percent of those young people (excluding students) will 

be unemployed, discouraged, or economically inactive by 

2025 (AfDB, 2016). It is instructive to note that the “Arab 

Spring” that started in Tunisia was due to a combination of 

highly educated and unemployed youths.4 The emergence 

of associations of unemployed graduates points to coming 

agitation if softer means of engagement do not translate 

into results.5 

The key to creating decent jobs is policies and strategies 

that increase productivity, increase labor elasticity, and 

increase the capacity of the economy to reallocate labor 

from traditional to modern jobs and sectors. However, 

these strategies are not “free” and may involve trade-offs, 

especially between labor elasticity and productivity growth, 

which have an inverse relationship. 

The jobs challenge prompted the African Development 

Bank to develop a Ten-Year Strategy (TYS) that aims to 

equip young people with the right skills for both the formal 

and informal sectors, including the skills to create small 

businesses (AfDB, 2013). The AfDB has also launched the 

Jobs for Youth Initiative in Africa (JfYA) to complement 

the Ten-Year Strategy. The initiative aims to help African 



The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 33 

Box 2.1 The Africa–European Union Immigration Challenge: 
Shifting the Frontier to the Home Country

Illegal immigration has been one response to Africa’s job crisis. Although most migration 

is within the region of origin, when migrants leave Africa, their destination tends to be their 

former colonizing country. This means that Europe bears the brunt of illegal immigration out 

of Africa. This has become a major political problem for European leaders because the public 

is increasingly hostile to immigration. 

Indeed, creating economic opportunities for youth in Africa and immigration were two of 

the four agenda items tackled in the 5th Africa-EU summit (http://www.consilium.europa.

eu/en/meetings/international-summit/2017/11/29-30/). At the summit, a new EU external 

investment plan was presented. It aims to trigger €44 billion of investments in Africa by 2020, 

thereby creating new job opportunities for young people across the African continent. A recent 

report commissioned by the Italian Agency for Development Cooperation, the AICS-ICID Report, 

calls for a coordinated set of actions to ensure that people do not choose to migrate in the first 

place. Proposed actions include support for policies to expand local employment opportunities, 

particularly by encouraging entrepreneurship, developing human capital (including vocational 

education and training), providing employment services, and subsidizing employment.

Sources: Frigenti and Rosati (2017); Ratha et al. (2011).

http://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/meetings/international-summit/2017/11/29-30/
http://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/meetings/international-summit/2017/11/29-30/


34 | Chapter 2

countries create 25 million jobs and benefit 50 million youth 

over the decade 2016-25 (AfDB, 2016).6 Various approaches 

point to a number of broad strategies for growth and 

employment, as discussed next. 

Economic Transformation Policies 
Economic transformation can increase productivity and 

unleash more dynamic sectors that absorb labor. Several 

transformation policies are promising. 

• Agriculture-driven transformation. An agricultural 

sector characterized by high productivity can support 

agro-processing. Manufacturers of high-quality prod-

ucts for local and export markets can create many jobs 

across value chains that include manufacturing, logis-

tics, and retailing. The sector may also act as a stim-

ulus for broader economic development through many 

potential linkages with other subsectors of the industry 

and services sectors (ACET, 2017; AfDB, 2018). 

• Local content and local participation. The responsiveness 

of subsectors, especially extractives, that do not create 

many jobs can be improved by developing stronger 

linkages between these subsectors and the broader 

economy through increased local content and local 

participation (ACET, 2014). 

• Modernizing the services sector. The key is to improve 

the productivity of this sector, particularly its large 

informal part. One way to do this is by using information 

and communications technologies (ICT), such as mobile 

payment systems and ordering systems. 

• Export-oriented manufacturing. A policy priority is 

to encourage a shift toward more labor-absorbing 

growth paths, characterized by strong backward and 

forward linkages between firms. However, given small 

domestic markets, manufacturing in Africa is unlikely to 

experience dynamic growth and employment creation 

without a significant degree of export focus and export 

specialization, Bhorat, Steenkamp, and Rooney (2017) 

argue.

• Enhancing infrastructure. Rapid urbanization in Africa 

presents many opportunities for young entrepreneurs 

to develop businesses that serve an increasingly urban 

and connected population in an environment that 

provides higher returns to scale and agglomeration 

(AfDB, 2015). However, this opportunity can be unlocked 

only by providing infrastructure, especially for smaller 

cities. Building this infrastructure will also be a source 

of employment, Freire, Lall, and Leipziger (2014) note. 

6.  JfYA has three main objectives: to address demand challenges by creating greater economic opportunities for youth; to address supply challenges 

by equipping youth with skills that position them for the jobs of tomorrow; and to address linkage challenges and better connect youth to economic 

opportunities.



The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 35 

Facilitative Policies 
Economic transformation polices should be complemented 

with other polices, especially those to enhance labor 

reallocation, stimulate entrepreneurship, and support 

companies in coping with difficulties. Some relevant polices 

are discussed next. 

• Push policies. Pull policies need to be combined with 

push policies to be more effective. This is especially 

critical due to the dual nature of African economies, 

where a high-productivity modern formal sector 

operates side by side with a low-productivity informal 

sector. There is a need to facilitate the movement 

of workers from low-productivity activities to those 

with higher productivity. Even as opportunities are 

created through transformational policies, workers in 

traditional sectors may not know about the openings 

and/or they may be too poor to afford the job search 

cost and even the cost of moving when a better job 

awaits. Therefore, polices that facilitate movement of 

labor out of the traditional sector to modern sectors are 

key. One approach is to establish job centers that can 

create awareness of opportunities (such as job fairs); 

match potential employers with potential employees; 

provide training to close skills gaps; help job seekers 

write resumés and prepare for interviews; and provide 

cash support to cover search costs or transition to a 

new activity (such as temporary housing support). 

• Training and skills development. Training and skills 

development programs are also important. In developing 

and executing the skills and training strategies, 

governments should work with the private sector and 

the academic community to decide on priorities and 

forms of intervention (AfDB, 2018). 

• Improved regulation. A supportive regulatory environment 

for both the formal and informal economy is another key 

measure. For example, regulatory reforms in Rwanda led 

to a more than quadrupling of new firms from 700 to 3,000 

per year (McKinsey Global Institute, 2012). 

• Wage subsidies. Subsidies can allow employers to 

keep employees on their payroll rather than lay them 

off for economic reasons. Subsidies can also enable 

companies to hire young workers (or women, in specific 

instances) by paying part of their salary for a given 

period, allowing them to acquire or develop skills that 

can eventually provide long-term employment (AfDB, 

2018). However, fiscal constraints are severe. 

• Improved data collection and dissemination. While the 

preceding policies can play a role, the mix of polices 

that work in certain countries is highly dependent on 

context. This underscores the need for good data to 

design policies based on evidence. It is vital to invest in 

regular labor market data collection and ensure timely 

public access so that policy making can benefit from 

researchers’ analysis. 





The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 37 

The Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR) 
Efforts to address the jobs challenge are being complicated 

by recent technological breakthroughs that are unleashing 

new capabilities and fundamentally changing the nature of 

work (see Box 1.1 in Chapter 1). This technological revolution 

is being referred as the Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR). 

For Africa, 4IR is a double-edged sword. On the one hand, 

it can increase productivity, meaning that fewer people will be 

needed to perform the same tasks as automation complements 

humans. Forty-one percent of all work activities in South Africa 

are susceptible to automation—as are 44 percent in Ethiopia, 

46 percent in Nigeria, and 52 percent in Kenya, the World 

Economic Forum finds (WEF, 2017). On the other hand, 4IR 

technologies can enable new types of activities. For instance, 

mobile phones are allowing people who did not have insurance 

to buy micro-insurance. Sharing platforms like Airbnb are 

allowing people to convert extra rooms into rental units that 

are attracting new types of tourists. 

4IR and Economic Transformation 
The key challenge for Africa is structural transformation. 

Economic transformation strategies can increase productivity 

while simultaneously increasing employment elasticity. 

Thus, the crucial question is whether 4IR can enable or 

hinder transformation. A closer look at some of the proposed 

employment and growth strategies in light of 4IR points to the 

need to rethink the strategies (see Table 2.2).

• Agriculture-driven transformation. Agriculture-driven 

transformation is likely to be more energized by 4IR. 

ICTs can play a major role in upgrading all stages of 

agricultural value chains. Precision agriculture can 

increase productivity at the farm level using “big data” 

and autonomous vehicles to optimize application of 

inputs. ICT platforms can help develop new business 

models that are particularly amenable to increased youth 

participation. Examples include delivering agricultural 

services by connecting farmers to service providers, 

such as “Trotro Tractor”7 and “Hello Tractor,” which allow 

farmers to buy mechanization services. The Esoko8 

platform is allowing farmers to connect to markets. 

Blockchain technologies are being used to guarantee 

food safety standards that are key to participating in 

lucrative international food markets. Big data and the 

Internet of Things (IoT) are making “telephone” farming a 

reality.9 In this way, the middle class is increasingly able 

to farm their out-of-town holdings while working in town. 

7.  http://www.trotrotractor.com/. 

8.  https://www.esoko.com/.

9. IBM’s EZ-Farm project is exploring how sophisticated data analytics can help farmers keep in touch with what is really happening on their out-of-town 

smallholdings. Sensors strategically placed around the farm monitor water tank levels, the amount of moisture in the soil, as well as the performance of 

irrigation equipment. Infrared cameras measure rates of photosynthesis, which can indicate whether crops are being watered too much or too little. All 

these data are streamed wirelessly to the IBM Cloud and accessed by the farmer via a smartphone app. http://www.bbc.com/news/business-33610593.



38 | Chapter 2

Table 2.2 The Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR) and Transformation Strategies 

4IR technology

Transformation strategy AI/Machine learning Internet of Things (IoT) Big data/data science

Agricultural transformation

• Application in plant breeding 
to speed varietal selection

• Intelligent robots are reducing 
applications of inputs by over 
90 percent

• Use of drones to monitor crops
• Internet- enabled irrigation 

systems 

• Telephone farming
• e-extension
• Inputs-as-servicea

• Use of Big Data for credit 
scoring of farmers

Modernized services

• Driverless cars will eliminate 
jobs in transportation

• Potentially many applications 
especially (e.g. credit scoring 
using non-standard data)

• Sale of solar power as utility/
service through internet- 
enabled cookers and solar 
panels (e.g. M-Kopa)

• Shared economy (e.g. AirBnB) 
• Financial inclusion (e.g. 

micro-insurance) 
• e-commerce (e.g. Jumia, 

iRoko)

Local content

• Potential for development 
of sophisticated machine-
learning algorithms to 

interpret and/or explore data

• Drone-based services (e.g. 
facilities inspection, mapping)

• Geological data mining may 
create new opportunities 

Export-led manufacturing
• Advanced robots will eliminate 

the advantage of cheap labor 

Will enable very specific market 
segmentation and eliminate mass 
markets 

Infrastructure 
Alternative infrastructure 
(e.g. drones)

Overall impact of 4IR technology Will eliminate traditional paths of 
industrialization

The most dynamic of 4IR 
technology for Africa. Potential to 
create many jobs

4IR technologies will have a very varied impact on various economic transformation strategies for Africa. 



The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 39 

4IR technology

Transformation strategy 3D Printing Blockchain technologies
Net impact on 
competitiveness

Agricultural transformation
• Locally fabricated agricultural 

machines 
• Food traceability system for 

international trade 

• Very high. Agriculture has 
many potential entry points 
and little downside in terms of 
job losses.

Modernized services
• Toll/contract manufacturing 
• Community workshops 

• Numerous trust-based 
applications (land registries, 
contracting)

• Cryptocurrency-based 
transactions

• Very high. This sector is 
already very dynamic. An 
e-commerce company valued 
at $1 billion, M-Pesa, is 
already the biggest money 
transfer service in the world.

Local content • Locally manufactured parts 

• High to moderate. Much 
potential here, but will require 
much support to build new 
capability, especially in 
artificial intelligence, data 
science, and 3D printing.

Export-led manufacturing • Will eliminate the factory 
manufacturing model 

• Very low. This will not be a 
viable strategy in the 4IR 
world.

Infrastructure • Neutral

Overall impact of 4IR technology
Presents great opportunity for 
leapfrogging into manufacturing 

Potential to formalize the huge 
informal sector 

a.  For instance, rather than buy an “input” say a herbicide, a farmer can buy a “weed killing” service i.e. the service provider comes in and spray the weeds 

saving the farmer the cost of buying spraying equipment and/or excess herbicide. Similarly a farmer can buy ploughing service rather than buy a tractor, 

for example TroTro Tractor Limited in Ghana offers ploughing services by connecting farmers and tractor operators using IoT and Big Data. So rather 

than buying the input (tractors) the farmer is buying an input service (ploughing).

Note: An empty cell means that no meaningful application has been identified by the authors.



40 | Chapter 2

• Modernized services. This is perhaps the most dynamic 

area. Internet and mobile phones have allowed many 

services to be developed and rolled out. For example, 

the Africa Internet Group (AIG) is involved in various 

kinds of e-commerce and has been able to leverage 

internet platforms to create the first billion-dollar 

internet business in Africa, the so-called “unicorns.”10 

In Kenya, M-Pesa is now the biggest money transfer 

system in the world. The M-Pesa platform allows people 

to pay for all kinds of services and is rapidly formalizing 

the informal sector by bringing many transactions 

online. Mobile phones have also brought banking, 

insurance, and other financial services to many who 

had previously been excluded. Accra Metropolitan 

Authority (AMA) is exploring how it can leverage big 

data technologies to analyze mobile phone data to get 

to see how people move around within the city and 

thus optimize transportation systems.11 In East Africa, 

M-Kopa is selling solar power as a service or utility to 

500,000 poor households using an IoT platform that 

has solar panels and cooking stoves connected to the 

internet.12 

• Local content and local participation. The enclave 

nature of extractive industries is more a reflection of the 

specialized nature of the sector, which makes it harder 

for local industries to supply equipment and parts. 3D 

printing will make it easier to develop local fabrication 

capacities to supply this sector.

• Export-oriented manufacturing. Automation is erasing 

the cheap labor advantage and is leading to relocation 

of operations from Asia back to Western industrialized 

countries as robots and AI change the economics of 

manufacturing. Africa’s share in robots sold in 2015 

(around 0.2 percent of world sales) is more than 15 times 

lower than its share in world GDP (around 3 percent). 

Indeed, the Overseas Development Institute (ODI) notes 

that as the cost of capital falls in developed countries, 

developed countries will find it more efficient to reshore 

manufacturing activities from Africa (and elsewhere) 

(Banga and te Velde, 2018). The recent evidence for 

the United States suggests that this leads to a loss of 

roughly 126 African jobs per company reshored.13 Thus 

the prospect of Asian manufacturing moving to Africa as 

labor costs rise in Asia is no longer a viable strategy for 

10.  AIG businesses in Africa include Jumia (an e-commerce platform); Zando (shoes and clothing); Hellofood (a food delivery service); Kaymu (an online 

resale marketplace); Lamudi (a real estate classified platform); EasyTaxi (a cab-hailing service); Jovago (a hotel-booking portal); Everjobs (a jobs 

classified site); and Carmudi (a car-selling platform). Started in 2012, AIG now operates in 23 African countries.

11.  http://www-03.ibm.com/press/us/en/pressrelease/40817.wss. 

12.  http://www.idgconnect.com/abstract/26156/how-iot-big-data-tackling-africa.

13.  Between 2010 and 2015, 250,000 jobs were reshored to the United States, Banga and te Velde (2018).



The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 41 

transformation, or at best a very problematic one. The 

ODI report further notes that new goods emerging from 

the Fourth Industrial Revolution are based on a digital 

thread connecting tasks undertaken before and after 

manufacturing with the actual manufacturing stage. 

This requires advanced infrastructure, research and 

development (R&D) skills, and skilled labor along the 

whole value chain. Thus, it is unlikely that manufacturing 

will shift to Africa, given limited digitization. This 

trend could potentially lead to the concentration of 

manufacturing in other developing countries, limiting 

opportunities for technological diffusion and spillovers. 

All the same, ODI argues that there is a window of opportunity 

for African countries to move into less automated sectors, 

where technology installation has been slow (Banga and te 

Velde, 2018). Automation varies greatly across sectors, with 

automotive and electronics sectors being at the forefront while 

food processing and furniture production lag. This provides an 

opportunity for manufacturing focused on local and regional 

markets. Further, even as these industries become susceptible 

to automation, ODI (2018) point that because of their lower 

labor costs, African countries will tend to have decade longer 

to adjust before cost of robots falls enough to replace human 

labor. This window can be used to build manufacturing 

capabilities, underscoring the need for continued focus on 

improvements in basic infrastructure—such as a reliable 

power supply, tele-communications, and roads—combined 

with a targeted approach to building industrial capabilities. 

Mastering traditional manufacturing makes it easier to jump 

to more complex digitized manufacturing.

Beyond automation, advances in 3D printing may totally 

disrupt this sector as small shops gain the capability to 

make sophisticated, customized products and yet still 

be competitive. Thus, an export-oriented manufacturing 

strategy is likely to be very problematic in light of 4IR 

developments.

Facilitative Policies 
4IR technologies can be deployed to help make facilitative 

policies more effective. 

• Push policies. By providing information, training, 

and links to employers and other resources, internet 

platforms can be leveraged to improve push policies. 

Many job platforms exist, such as Jobberman in Ghana, 

which advertises jobs, holds job fairs, and provides help 

with developing resumés.14 The JobMatch program in 

Rwanda seeks to connect prospective employers and 

disadvantaged youth through a matching system using 

text messages (Dawes, Nema, and Zelezny-Green, 

2014). 

• Training and skills development. 4IR technologies 

provide opportunities for innovative delivery of training. 

Online courses are available from the best centers 

of learning in the world through Massive Online Open 

Courses (MOOCs).

14.  https://thebftonline.com/business/jobberman-ghana-holds-instant-hire-job-fair/. 



42 | Chapter 2

• Improved regulation. 4IR technologies can make 

business regulation smoother. In Kenya, the government 

runs ICT centers, called Huduma Centres, that serve as 

a one-stop shop for government services. Users can 

access many services, including quick registration of 

companies and payment of various licenses. 

• Wage subsidies. Subsidies are susceptible to political 

problems, including patronage. For example, a powerful 

politician can direct funds to companies in return for 

jobs for his/her supporters. Big data and artificial 

intelligence (AI) algorithms can reduce this type of 

abuse by making payments purely driven by data, with 

little or no human input. 

 

• Improved data collection. Data collection can also be 

greatly improved using new technologies. For example, 

data on locations and payments that can be collected 

from cell phones can provide interesting insights 

on where economic activity is taking place. Mobile 

platforms also provide the opportunity for doing surveys 

on employment. 

Looking Ahead 
One of the impacts of 4IR is increased productivity. For African 

countries, this probably means increased productivity of the 

modern sector. Growth driven by automation may create 

jobs to support new business lines that may be enabled by 

the 4IR technologies. On the other hand, growth may stem 

from more production of the same things the firm has been 

producing through efficiencies enabled by 4IR, and may thus 

eliminate some jobs. For now, the evidence seems to point to 

elimination of jobs through automation. However, 4IR offers 

many opportunities to support transformation strategies that 

are job-creating growth pathways. This is especially true for 

agriculture and services, where applications are numerous. 

Nascent areas of local content provision can also create many 

opportunities, though much capacity will need to be built.

Indeed, a major concern is the low level of preparedness 

of countries to take advantage of opportunities. Across the 

region, employers identify inadequately skilled workers 

as a major constraint to their businesses, including 41 

percent of all firms in Tanzania, 30 percent in Kenya, 9 

percent in South Africa, and 6 percent in Nigeria (WEF, 

2017). The AfDB (2018) points out that too few scientists 

and engineers in Africa work in sectors that drive economic 

transformation. This pattern is likely to get worse—a point 

underscored by the fact that African college graduates 

with a science, technology, engineering, or mathematics 

(STEM) degree, represent only 2 percent of the continent’s 

total university-age population. Yet these STEM skills are 

crucial requirements in a 4IR world.15

Thus, while Africa will surely face the disruptions 

associated with 4IR, the region currently is ill-prepared to 

15.  In 2010, for example, the share of college students in engineering, manufacturing, and construction programs was 7.3 percent in Burkina Faso, 3.0 

percent in Burundi, 4.3 percent in Cameroon, 4.5 percent in Mozambique, 5.6 percent in Madagascar, 5.9 percent in Ghana, and 12.8 percent in Morocco. 

In 2014 the shares in Austria, Germany, Malaysia, and Mexico were all above 20 percent (AfDB, 2018). 



The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 43 



44 | Chapter 2

take advantage of the unique opportunities that will come 

with those challenges. Yet there is no doubt that Africa 

has the potential to accelerate its development using 4IR 

platforms. In less than 15 years, the continent has grown to 

become the world’s second-largest mobile phone market, 

offering millions of families access to financial services, 

public health information, and the internet (De Klerk, no date). 

Even more impressive is how young people have used this 

technology as a platform to unleash their entrepreneurial 

potential. This has led to the emergence of a growing 

pool of mostly young, successful entrepreneurs. With 

the right support, Africa’s success with mobile platforms 

can be replicated on increasingly powerful 4IR platforms 

and can drive transformation of African economies.16 This 

underscores the need to revisit job creation and growth 

strategies so that they can address the opportunities and 

challenges presented by 4IR.

16.  To be sure, 4IR is happening within a broader socioeconomic and cultural context. In Sub-Saharan Africa, the basic concern for food and personal 

security remains crucial. On the global scale, however, concern for sustainability in the face of looming climate change and environmental degradation 

takes center stage. The fact that socioeconomic issues are highly specific to context means that the exact impact of 4IR will differ by country and by 

region.



The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 45 

A new EU investment plan 
aims to create new job 
opportunities for young 
people across the African 
continent.



46 | Chapter 2

References 

ACET (African Centre for Economic Transformation). 2014. Africa 

Transformation Report. Accra: ACET. 

---------. 2017. Africa Transformation Report 2017: Agriculture 

Powering Africa. Accra: ACET. 

AfDB (African Development Bank). 2013. At the Center of Africa’s 

Transformation: Strategy for 2013-2022. Abidjan: African 

Development Bank Group. 

---------. 2015. African Development Report 2015: Growth, Poverty 

and Inequality Nexus. Abidjan: African Development Bank Group. 

---------. 2016. Jobs for Youth in Africa—Strategy for Creating 25 

Million Jobs and Equipping 50 Million Youth, 2016-2025. Abidjan: 

African Development Bank Group. 

---------. 2017. Growth and Job Creation: Policy Options for Pro-

Employment Growth. Background paper for the African Economic 

Outlook 2018 report of the African Development Bank, African 

Development Bank Group, Abidjan. 

---------. 2018. Africa Economic Outlook 2018. Abidjan: African 

Development Bank Group. 

Banga, K., and D. W. te Velde. 2018. Digitalization and the Future of 

Manufacturing in Africa. ODI (Overseas Development Institute) 

SET (Supporting Economic Transformation) Programme. Draft 

report, February.

 Benjamin, N., and A. A. Mbaye. 2014. Informality, Growth, and 

Development in Africa. WIDER Working Paper 2014/052, United 

Nations University (UNU)-Wider. 

Bhorat, H., F. Steenkamp, and C. Rooney. 2017. Understanding 

the Determinants of Africa’s Manufacturing Malaise. In 

Income Inequality Trends in Sub-Saharan Africa: Divergence, 

Determinants and Consequences, edited by A. Odusola, G. A. 

Cornia, H. Bhorat, and P. Conceição, 103–28. New York: United 

Nations Development Programme. 

Bhorat, H., and F. Tarp, eds. 2016. Africa’s Lions: Growth Traps 

and Opportunities for Six African Economies. Washington, DC: 

Brookings Institution Press. 

Bloom, D., D. Canning, and J. Sevilla. 2003. The Demographic 

Dividend: A New Perspective on the Economic Consequences of 

Population Change. Santa Monica, CA: RAND. 

de Klerk, Nico. No date. Fourth Industrial Revolution: 

A Force for Stability or Volatility in Africa? http://

www.defenceweb.co.za/index.php?option=com_

content&view=article&id=43192&Itemid=116&ca 

tid=.

Dawes, L., P. Nema, and R. Zelezny-Green. 2014. Scaling 

Mobile Employment Services: A Stakeholder Perspective: 

Increasing Opportunities for Youth through Mobile. GSMA 

Mobile for Employment, May 13. https://www.gsma.com/

mobilefordevelopment/wp-content/uploads/2014/05/Scaling-

Mobile-Employment-Services-A-Stakeholder-Perspective.pdf. 

Freire, M. E., S. Lall, and D. Leipziger. 2014. Africa’s Urbanization: 

Challenges and Opportunities. Working Paper No. 7, The Growth 

Dialogue, Washington, DC. 



The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 47 

Frigenti, F., and F. C. Rosati. 2017. Moving Upstream the ‘Relevant’ 

Migration Frontier. Strategic Priorities to Turn the Migration 

Challenge into a Development Opportunity. ICID blog, the Italian 

Centre for International Development. http://www.icid.info/icid-

blog/9-69/moving-upstream-the-relevant-migration-frontier-

strategic-priorities-to-turn-the-migration-challenge-into-a-

development-opportunity#.WnwewK5l_IX. 

ILO (International Labour Organization). 2018. ILOSTAT http://www.

ilo.org/ilostat (accessed January 25, 20118) 

McKinsey Global Institute. 2012. Africa at Work: Job Creation and 

Inclusive Growth. McKinsey Global Institute. 

Ratha, D., S. Mohapatra, C. Özden, S. Plaza, W. Shaw, and A. Shimeles. 

2011. Leveraging Migration for Africa: Remittances, Skills, and 

Investments. Washington, DC: World Bank. 

UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural 

Organization). 2011. Arab Youth: Civic Engagement and Economic 

Participation. Beirut: UNESCO Regional Bureau for Education in 

the Arab States. 

WEF (World Economic Forum). 2017. The Future of Jobs and Skills in 

Africa—Preparing the Region for the Fourth Industrial Revolution. 

Davos-Klosters: World Economic Forum.

http://www.ilo.org/ilostat/faces/wcnav_defaultSelection;ILOSTATCOOKIE=hUGPotaP8nPXh77EmCDiwWeTA2FdrtHC5TQj391o8hl4iBMKHZc3!1506268203?_afrLoop=1375044999996083&_afrWindowMode=0&_afrWindowId=null#!%40%40%3F_afrWindowId%3Dnull%26_afrLoop%3D1375044999996083%26_afrWindowMode%3D0%26_adf.ctrl-state%3Djf99o5njw_4
http://www.ilo.org/ilostat/faces/wcnav_defaultSelection;ILOSTATCOOKIE=hUGPotaP8nPXh77EmCDiwWeTA2FdrtHC5TQj391o8hl4iBMKHZc3!1506268203?_afrLoop=1375044999996083&_afrWindowMode=0&_afrWindowId=null#!%40%40%3F_afrWindowId%3Dnull%26_afrLoop%3D1375044999996083%26_afrWindowMode%3D0%26_adf.ctrl-state%3Djf99o5njw_4


48 | Chapter 3



The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 49 

Chapter 3
The Future 
of Work in 
Developing 
Asia 

Developing Asia has done remarkably well in creating jobs 
for its workers. Recent advances in technology will further 
fuel productivity gains. Yet there is concern that the high 
degree of automation made possible by some of these 
advances could cause widespread job losses.
However, there are good reasons to remain optimistic 
about Developing Asia’s job prospects. First, job 
automation takes place only where it is both technically 
and economically feasible. This tends to be in capital-
intensive manufacturing, where employment levels in 
the region are relatively low. Second, data covering 12 
Developing Asian economies show that from 2005 to 2015 
rising domestic demand more than compensated for jobs 
lost due to technological advances. This pattern is likely to 
continue as a growing middle class consumes more and 
better goods and services. Third, technological change and 
rising incomes will lead to new occupations and industries, 
further offsetting labor displacement due to automation. 



50 | Chapter 3

Jobs in Asia
Developing Asia has done remarkably well in creating jobs for its workers.1 Over the past 

25 years, the region has created 30 million nonagricultural jobs annually. Job creation has 

been accompanied by improved productivity and rising earnings for workers, leading to 

large reductions in poverty. Shifts in employment from agriculture to industry and services, 

where pay and productivity are higher, have been important to the process (Figure 3.1, 

panel a). However, improved productivity within sectors has typically been the main driver 

of countrywide productivity growth (Figure 3.1, panel b). Technological advances, such as 

high-yielding varieties in farming, modern machine tools in manufacturing (like numerically 

controlled lathes), and information and communication technology (ICT) in services, have 

been central to productivity gains. International trade, foreign direct investment, and 

investments in education, infrastructure, and research and development have played key 

roles in promoting the development and adoption of new technologies. Macroeconomic 

stability and a business-friendly investment climate have also provided an environment 

conducive to sustained growth.

Nonetheless, new technologies will alter the composition of skills needed 
by the workforce. It may also lead to more frequent unemployment, lower 

wage growth—especially for the less skilled—and widening income inequality. 
Governments should respond by ensuring that workers are protected from these 
negative effects. Ensuring that new technologies serve the broader development 

agenda also requires paying careful attention to using technologies in the 
delivery of public services and supporting their spread and further development.

1.  This chapter uses official country names as approved by the Board of Directors of the Asian Development Bank.



The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 51 

Figure 3.1 Poverty Reduction and the Components of Productivity Growth, 
Developing Asia, 1993-2013

Shifts in employment from agriculture to industry and services have led to a big drop in poverty, but 

improved productivity within sectors has also been important.

Structural change (percentage)

10

20

0

-10

-20

-30

-40

-50

-60

-70

-80

-1.0 -0.5 0 0.5 1.0 2.01.5 2.5

Pe
rc

en
ta

ge
 p

oi
nt

 c
ha

ng
e 

in
 p

ov
er

ty
 ra

te
s

Tajikistan

Malaysia

Pakistan

Armenia
Indonesia

Mongolia

Bangladesh

India
Thailand

Kazakhstan

Azerbaijan

Viet Nam

Sri Lanka

Philippines

People’s Republic of China

NepalKyrgyz Republic

Republic of Korea

Vanuatu

Tonga

Uzbekistan

Fiji

a. Structural change and change in poverty rates ($3.20/day), 1993-2013



52 | Chapter 3

876543210

Pakistan

Fiji

Nepal

Philippines

Malaysia

Indonesia

Thailand

Mongolia

Bangladesh

Cambodia

Viet Nam

Sri Lanka

India

People’s Republic of China

Within-sector productivity growth
Structural change

b. Components of productivity growth, 1993-2013 (percentage)

Source: Adapted from  ADB (2018). 

Note: Panel a contains 31 countries classified as low- and middle-income countries in 1993; only developing Asian economies are labeled. A poverty 

line of $3.20/day in 2011 purchasing power parity terms is used. Following McMillan, Rodrik, and Verduzco-Gallo (2014), changes in economy-wide labor 

productivity have been decomposed into structural change—the gains in productivity from shifts of employment from lower- to higher-productivity 

sectors—and the contributions from improvements in sector-specific labor productivity.



The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 53 



54 | Chapter 3

Recent advances in technology will further fuel productivity 

gains. However, concerns have been raised about their 

potentially adverse impact on jobs. New technologies 

underlying the oft-cited Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR)—

such as robotics, three-dimensional printing, artificial 

intelligence, mobile internet, and the emerging Internet 

of Things—will help drive future prosperity. Yet, they also 

pose challenges for workers. In textiles and footwear, for 

example, experiments in completely automated production 

are now being conducted. Similarly, it is becoming 

technically feasible to automate more complex services 

such as customer support and financial analysis. This has 

raised concerns that automation could cause widespread 

job losses, slow wage growth, and worsen income inequality 

in developed and developing economies alike. Some studies 

of Asia’s developing economies indicate that over half of 

today’s jobs could be at risk (McKinsey Global Institute, 

2017; Chang, Rynhart, and Huynh, 2016).

Is Automation Anxiety Justified?
There are several reasons why dire predictions of jobs 

lost will unlikely be borne out, especially in the context of 

Developing Asia. First, the typical job consists of several 

tasks, only some of which may be automated. Second, 

even if it is technically feasible to automate a task, doing 

so may not be economically viable. Third, especially in 

the context of low- and middle-income countries, where 

much growth potential remains (even through greater 

use of now standard technologies such as electricity and 

modern transport), rising demand for goods and services 

offers a countervailing force to automation-driven labor 

displacement. Finally, technological change and economic 

growth have always gone hand in hand with the creation 

of new industries and occupations; there is no reason this 

time must be different.

An analysis of employment changes in Developing 

Asia since the early 2000s provides insights into how new 

technologies and other forces have been affecting jobs 

and will shape their future. While technologies associated 

with “extreme” automation are only just starting to appear, 

modern machine tools and ICT have already been put to work 

in many factories and firms. Data on the use of industrial 

robots—defined as machines that can be programmed to 

perform production-related tasks without the need of a 

human controller—show that between 2010 and 2015, the 

stock of robots rose 70 percent to 887,400 units in nine 

developing Asian economies. Moreover, consistent with 

analytical work on the effects of automation on different 

types of jobs, labor force survey data reveal that the share 

of jobs intensive in nonroutine tasks is on the rise, while the 

share of jobs intensive in routine tasks has been declining 

(Figure 3.2). Therefore, analyzing employment changes over 

recent years offers insight on how technological change will 

affect jobs.



The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 55 

Figure 3.2 Nonroutine Employment Shares in Developing Asia 
and Selected Asian Economies, 2005-15
The share of jobs intensive in nonroutine tasks is increasing, while the share of jobs 

intensive in routine tasks has been decreasing.

Manufacturers will continue to rely on workers because 

of both technological and economic feasibility. For example, 

comparing the production of garments to automobiles, 

more technological sophistication is required for a robot to 

have the dexterity to work with cloth and carry out stitching 

operations than work with large metal parts; at the same 

time, average wages are relatively low in sectors such as 

apparel and footwear, making automation uneconomical. 

Accordingly, Developing Asia’s growing use of industrial 

robots is concentrated in areas of capital-intensive 

manufacturing—which, significantly, have relatively low 

employment levels to begin with (Figure 3.3). Thus, while 

the electrical and electronics sector and automotive sector 

each accounted for 39 percent of total robot use in 2015, 

they accounted for only 9.2 percent and 4.2 percent of 

total manufacturing employment, respectively. In contrast, 

Source: Decomposition result derived from ADB (2018).

Note: Classification into routine and nonroutine is based on Autor and Dorn (2013) and excludes agricultural occupations. Countries appear in ascending 

order of percentage point increase in nonroutine employment. Developing Asia includes 12 Asian developing member economies: Bangladesh; the People’s 

Republic of China; India; Indonesia; the Republic of Korea; Malaysia; Mongolia; the Philippines; Sri Lanka; Taipei,China; Thailand; and Viet Nam.

Developing Asia

Viet Nam

People’s Republic 
of China

Indonesia

Philippines

Bangladesh

India

Malaysia

Sri Lanka

0 10 20 30 40 50

 6.9%

 15.2%

 10.1%

 5.9%

 5.3%

 3.3%

 3.1%

 1.9%

 1.0%

2005

2015



56 | Chapter 3

textiles, apparel and leather combined accounted for only 

0.1 percent of robot usage in 2015, but 19.2 percent of 

total manufacturing employment. Given that robot usage 

is concentrated in sectors with relatively low employment, 

concerns about robots replacing workers may be overstated.

Even as robots become more sophisticated, they are 

not likely to take over production in labor-intensive sectors 

in the foreseeable future. Notwithstanding the growing 

sophistication of sewing robots in garment manufacturing, 

for example, current cost structures suggest that even 

over the next five to ten years, sewing machine operators—

accounting for two-thirds of garment workers—will likely 

remain more cost effective than sewing robots. Moreover, 

technological transformation and innovation are being 

applied across the region’s factories to raise operational 

efficiency and reduce time lags, not just to displace labor. 

Thus, factories relying on sewing machine operators rather 

than sewing robots will remain competitive in global markets. 

Finally, for middle-income countries with large domestic 

markets, there will be even less pressure to switch to sewing 

machine robots. In India, for example, the domestic market 

for apparel could well increase by 250 percent over the next 

15 years, requiring an increase in garment workers even in 

the face of labor-saving technology.

Figure 3.3 Annual Supply of Robots and Sectoral Employment, 2015 
a. Robots by industry, Asia and the rest of the world, 2015

The use of robots remains highly concentrated in just a few sectors with relatively low employment. 

0 10,000 20,000 30,000 40,000 50,000

Textiles, apparel, 
and leather

Food and beverages

Plastic and 
chemical products

Metal

Automotive

Electrical and 
electronics

 Number of robots

Asia
Rest of the world



The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 57 

b. Employment shares by sector, selected Asian economies

Rising demand provides a strong countervailing force to 

job displacement driven by automation. New technologies 

often allow a given level of output to be produced by fewer 

workers. While this leads to a displacement effect on 

employment, a “productivity” effect can result in a rise in 

demand as costs of production and product prices decline 

in response to improved productivity. In principle, a strong 

increase in demand may even lead to an expansion of jobs 

in factories that automate parts of their production process. 

More generally, the productivity benefits of new technology 

in one industry lower production costs in other industries 

through input-output channels, contributing to an increase 

in demand and employment across industries. 

Because domestic demand is now the main growth driver 

in Developing Asia, “reshoring” production to advanced 

economies may not be a major threat to employment. In 

the 12 economies studied, only around 10 percent of total 

employment in 2015 depended directly and indirectly on 

final demand from advanced economies. Furthermore, while 

consumer markets in advanced economies are increasingly 

saturated, markets in Developing Asia and the rest of the 

world still have a high potential for growth. Therefore, even if 

automation in advanced economies caused some factories 

in the region to reshore, the employment impact will likely 

be muted.

Source: Adapted from ADB (2018).

Note: Asia includes the People’s Republic of China; India; Indonesia; the Republic of Korea; Malaysia; Singapore; Thailand; Taipei,China; and Viet Nam.

Electrical and
electronics

Automotive Metal Plastic and
chemicals

Food and
beverages

Textiles,
apparel, and 

leather

45,000

50,000

40,000

35,000

30,000

25,000

20,000

15,000

10,000

5,000

0

25

20

15

10

5

0

Ro
bo

t s
al

es

Pe
rc

en
t

Robot sales
Employment share in 
total manufacturing



58 | Chapter 3

Looking to the future, workers will continue to leave 

agriculture. But considerable scope remains to raise 

agricultural productivity and earnings in what will remain 

one of Asia’s largest employers. In advanced economies, 

the lowest paid employment tends to be in services, such 

as restaurants and hotels, where prospects of raising 

productivity are limited. In contrast, the lowest paid 

employment in Developing Asia tends to be agricultural, 

where prospects for productivity gains remain large. Even 

as workers exit agriculture, adopting today’s standard 

technologies—such as high-yielding varieties of staple 

grain crops and modern irrigation and farm machinery—

hold much potential benefit for those who remain. The 

latest Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR) technologies will 

expand productivity still further through bioinformatics 

and precision agriculture. While these advances will 

typically benefit larger farms, some applications using 

digital technology will help the typical farmer in the region 

working on relatively small plots of land with limited 

resources by lowering their information and transaction 

costs, connecting them with markets, and reducing the 

large gaps between farm gate and retail prices, helping 

them with production practices as well as with branding 

and marketing. 

In sectors such as health care, technological 

advancement has been rapid, but it will not displace labor. 

Technologies such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 

and precision medicine provide health care interventions 

that humans cannot. Rather than replace health care 

workers, they complement them in delivering medical care. 

Given that Asia and the Pacific is already experiencing 

a shortage of health care professionals (for example, 

there is less than 1 physician per 1,000 people in many 

Asian countries, while the Organisation for Economic 

Co-operation and Development [or OECD] average is 2.8), 

employment in the sector will expand, enabling remote 

knowledge support in underserved communities. Rising 

incomes in the region should also bring a significant 

increase in demand for health care services, including new 

jobs supporting “wellness.”

Technological change and economic growth lead to 

new occupations and industries. For example, auto repair 

workers and car salesmen were associated with the rise 

of the automobile industry in the early 1900s, just as jobs 

for “app developers,” ICT technicians, and informal social 

media retailers are growing today (Box 3.1). The creation 

of new occupations and industries is a key countervailing 

force against the displacement effect of new technology. 

A detailed analysis of occupation titles in three Asian 

countries shows that new types of jobs have emerged 

to handle new technologies. In Malaysia, India, and the 

Philippines, between 43 percent and 57 percent of new job 

titles that have emerged in the last 10 years are related to 

ICT (Figure 3.4). Significant shares of new job titles also 

emerged in one of India’s fastest growing occupation 

categories, Craft and Related Trades Workers. This was 

mainly driven by different types of technicians needed to 

work with computer numerical control machines. Such 

trends will continue. 

More generally, a comparison of occupations in the 

region with advanced economies shows considerable scope 

for job growth in many sectors. For example, the health 

and education sectors in the United States account for 15 

percent of total employment, while finance, insurance, real 



The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 59 

Figure 3.4 Occupations with the Highest Proportion of New Job 
Titles, India, Malaysia, and Philippines

Source: ADB (2018). 

Note: Calculations are based on comparisons made between NCO 2004 (based on ISCO 88) and NCO 2015 (ISCO 08) for India; PSOC 1990 (ISCO 88) and PSOC 

2012 (ISCO 08) for the Philippines; and MASCO-1998 (ISCO 88) and MASCO-2008 (ISCO 08) for Malaysia. ISCO = International Standard Classification of 

Occupations; MASCO = Malaysia Standard Classification of Occupations; NCO = National Classification of Occupations (India); PSOC = Philippine Standard 

Occupational Classification.

New types of jobs are emerging in high-skill occupations.

estate, and other business services account for 19 percent. 

In lower- and middle-income economies of Developing 

Asia, the corresponding shares range from 3.5 percent to 

6 percent, and from 1.5 percent to 6 percent, respectively, 

suggesting there is much scope for job growth in these 

services.

0 105 20 2515 30 35 40

ICT operations and user support technicians

Architects, planners, 
surveyors and designers

Software and application 
developers, and analysts

Life science technicians and 
related associate professionals

Medical and pharmaceutical technicians

Sales, marketing, and public 
relations professionals

Electronics and telecommunication 
installers and repairers

Electrotechnology engineers

Paramedical practitioners

Database and network professionals

Other health associate professionals

Malaysia 2008

Philippines 2012

India 2015



60 | Chapter 3

Box 3.1 The Use of E-commerce and Social 
Commerce by Asia’s Informal Retail Sector 

Despite the rapid growth in internet use, e-commerce in Southeast Asia remains in its infancy 

because of still-developing digital finance and weak logistics (Chadha, 2016). In Southeast 

and South Asia, less than one-third of companies have their own websites and only about half 

use e-mail to communicate with clients and suppliers (ADB, 2017). However, despite small 

e-commerce markets, developing countries lead the world in social commerce—unofficial 

e-commerce using social media. 

Social commerce is characterized by online sales and offline payments. The process 

begins on a social media platform; is followed by direct communication between buyer and 

seller, usually using instant messaging apps; and closes using offline payment (Malabuppha, 

2017). Cash-on-delivery is widely used (International Trade Center, 2017). The popularity 

of social media makes them cheaper e-commerce platforms than traditional e-commerce. 

While websites charge commissions, selling on social media is cost free.

Thailand and India are the world’s biggest social media shoppers, with 51 percent and 

32 percent of online shoppers using social media, respectively (PricewaterhouseCoopers, 

2016) (Figure 3.1.1). Facebook is the preferred platform for online selling in Viet Nam (Asia 

Pacific Foundation of Canada, 2017) and Indonesia (JakPat, 2015), and is widely used in the 

Philippines (Llamas, 2017). Thirty percent of e-commerce transactions in Southeast Asia 

come from social media sales (Chadha, 2016). 

India and Southeast Asia are the largest Facebook and Instagram users globally.a 

Social mobile use is also large and growing. Forty-seven percent of Southeast Asia’s 

population actively use social media, with 42 percent accessing from mobile devices 

(Klemp, 2017). 

Social commerce in the region is largely domestic. However, small businesses worldwide 

are becoming “micro-multinationals” by using digital platforms—including social media—

to connect with international customers and suppliers (McKinsey Global Institute, 2016). 

This has created new opportunities for informal retail sellers. Studies find that small and 

medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) using e-commerce increase revenues, lower costs, boost 



The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 61 

Figure 3.1.1 Online shoppers who said they purchased directly via social media

60

50

40

30

20

10

0
Thailand India Malaysia PRC Middle East World Canada Denmark Belgium

51

32 31
27 26

16

6 5 4

Pe
rc

en
ta

ge
 o

f o
nl

in
e 

sh
op

pe
rs

 v
ia

 s
oc

ia
l m

ed
ia

Thailand and India are the world’s biggest social media shoppers, followed closely by Malaysia and the 

People’s Republic of China.

Source: ADB (2018).

a.  India (250 million) is the largest Facebook user globally; Indonesia (130 million) is fourth; the Philippines is sixth (67 million); Viet Nam is seventh (55 

million); and Thailand is eighth (51 million). Indonesia (53 million) and India (52 million) are also the world’s third and fourth largest Instagram users, 

respectively (Statista 2018).

Source: PricewaterhouseCoopers (2016).

Note: The figure shows online purchases via social media sites as a percentage of total online purchases. PRC = 

People’s Republic of China.

profits, add jobs, and are more likely to export and innovate. 

As digital payment infrastructure and logistics increase 

efficiency, the informal sector will be better able to tap 

global markets. In an expanded digital age, the rise of social 

commerce is making e-commerce a reality for many sellers 

of limited skills and resources.



62 | Chapter 3



The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 63 

Automation Will Entail 
Hardships for Some Workers 
While the overall outlook is positive, automation will 

nonetheless create hardships for some workers. The 

availability of certain types of jobs will decline. And while 

new ones appear, they may be in different locations from 

displaced workers and/or require skills that workers may 

not possess. 

Employment and wages have grown faster in jobs 

requiring higher levels of cognitive and social functioning 

and/or intensive ICT use. A deeper analysis of employment 

trends in five developing Asian economies over roughly 

the past decade reveals that jobs with a high frequency of 

interactive tasks (such as internal and external negotiations 

or planning group activities), cognitive tasks (such as 

writing memos, analyzing data, and preparing charts and 

tables), and/or using ICT to perform complex tasks, have 

enjoyed relatively high growth in employment and wages. 

For example, employment in these types of jobs expanded 

2.6 percentage points faster than total employment 

annually, while average real wages increased twice as fast 

as the overall average wage. Conversely, jobs involving 

mainly manual work—which are lower paying to begin with—

have seen relatively limited employment and wage growth, 

contributing to rising inequality. 

People with relatively limited skills could get left behind. 

Workers with weak foundational skills—which are best 

learned during childhood and in schools and encompass 

not only basic reading, writing, numeracy, but also digital 

literacy and the ability to work in teams and persevere—are 

typically engaged in routine manual-intensive jobs. Without 

specific skills development or retraining, they will likely have 

a difficult time seizing expanded opportunities for more 

cognitively oriented jobs. 

Even some workers in cognitively oriented jobs that 

have relatively more routine tasks may face hardship. 

The business process outsourcing (BPO) industry in the 

Philippines illustrates this point. Industry experts estimate 

that in 2016, 47 percent of Philippine BPO workers focused 

on process-driven tasks involving relatively little abstract 

thinking. With the advent of new technologies, these jobs 

will likely decline dramatically as a share of total BPO jobs.

There will be new opportunities, of course, but they require 

more specialized training. For example, a worker employed 

as a medical transcriptionist may find his or her job lost to 

increasingly sophisticated voice and text/image recognition 

software. Filling a vacancy involving data analysis (a field 

where demand is expected to grow) will not be easy for such 

workers without appropriate training. 

Harnessing Technology for 
Asia’s Workers: Policy Responses 
The Fourth Industrial Revolution will change the role of 

government (Figure 3.5). Governments will need to support 

educational systems that provide lifelong learning. This 

will require schools to be equipped and incentivized to 

develop foundational skills—key to an individual’s ability to 

learn and relearn. Institutions are also needed that provide 

the specialized skills needed to work effectively with new 

technologies on the one hand, and develop the expertise 

required to spearhead innovation on the other. For the former, 

flexible training programs that can be interwoven with full-

time work and completed over a relatively short period are 

essential. They must cater not only to the young, but to adults 



64 | Chapter 3

seeking to retrain. Expertise required for innovation depends 

on a strong research orientation within universities, with 

help from innovation and incubation hubs acting as links 

between universities and industry. Finally, pathways linking 

higher education with technical and vocational education 

and training (TVET) must be developed to facilitate lifelong 

learning and, importantly, to enable promising individuals 

from disadvantaged backgrounds to gain expertise even 

later in life. 

Governments will need to ensure that labor regulations 

and social protection systems work together to protect 

workers rather than jobs. Labor markets will need to be 

flexible, allowing firms to reorganize their workplace and 

adjust employment in response to new technologies. At the 

same time, workers must be protected from income loss 

due to technological obsolescence and supported in finding 

new jobs. In practical terms, this requires that excessive 

regulatory barriers to hiring and firing be eliminated while 

Figure 3.5 The Role of Government in the Fourth Industrial Revolution

Response to 
technology

Use of 
technology

Support for 
technology

 Regulation of technology
 Support for displaced workers
 Responding to increased inequality

 Provision of public goods and services
 Improving governance and compliance

 Investments in infrastructure
 Education and training
 Support for innovation and technology adoption

Government policies are needed in the areas of using technology, supporting technology, and responding to technology.



The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 65 

social protection programs are strengthened. Regarding the 

latter, active labor market programs such as job placement 

services and training and retraining programs must be 

made more effective. Simultaneously, well-functioning 

unemployment benefit and public works programs, 

expanded health insurance coverage, and well-targeted 

income transfers are needed. 

Governments will need to mobilize resources to support 

skills development and social protection systems. Programs 

that help workers train or retrain appear to be dramatically 

underfunded in Developing Asia. This is also true of spending 

on social protection. With the share of government revenue 

to gross domestic product relatively low in many Asian 

countries, one way to increase revenues is to broaden the 

tax base and improve tax administration. There is also room 

for making income taxes more progressive and expanding 

on the use of capital gains tax, inheritance tax, and property 

tax in the region. This will not only raise revenue but will 

promote greater income equality. 

Governments must use new technologies to facilitate 

skills development, job-matching, and social protection. 

Machine learning and big data analytics can provide 

increasingly personalized solutions. Adaptive learning 

technology, for example, changes the content, sequence, 

and assessment a student encounters in real time depending 

on performance, with enhanced learning outcomes in 

schools. New technologies can improve job-matching by 

assessing and monitoring the evolution of occupations, 

providing instant feedback to users on the skills employers 

need and how to acquire them—or what job is best for their 

career growth. Finally, technological advances in biometric 

identification can improve the ways social protection 

programs function by reducing costs, improving the 

implementation of sophisticated unemployment benefit 

systems, and tracking services provided by job placement 

agencies.

Ensuring that new technologies serve the broader 

development agenda also has implications for public policy 

in other areas (Box 3.2). Given the central role of the internet 

in Fourth Industrial Revolution technologies, developing a 

nationwide broadband backbone is essential. Public-private 

partnerships (PPPs) will be needed to provide internet 

access to remote and low-income regions, with appropriate 

regulations covering mobile and internet providers to ensure 

internet services are affordable. Regulations must also cover 

cybersecurity and personal data protection and privacy. 

Competition policy will have to evolve to ensure that large 

information technology firms do not abuse their dominant 

positions. Appropriate public policies are critical to realize 

the use of new technologies for development. 



66 | Chapter 3

Box 3.2 Public Policy and Role of Technology 

One aspect of new technology that receives considerably less attention is the transformative 

impact that technology could have on the delivery of public services and effective 

governance. From the delivery of public goods such as education, health, and social security 

to market regulation and supervision, technology holds the promise of improving access to 

public services and making economic growth more inclusive. There are several examples of 

government use of technology (digital and others) in delivering public services in Asia. 

Digital technologies can enable social protection. India’s 2008 Aadhaar program is a 

large-scale digital ID scheme that allows the state to deliver government benefits directly 

to beneficiaries. Aadhaar has now registered approximately 1.2 billion people, covering 99 

percent of the adult population (Singh, 2017; The Hindu, 2017), and has been used to digitize 

government subsidy flows and passport issuance, among others uses—all benefitting those 

previously denied service access because they lacked proof of identity (Unique Identification 

Authority of India). Another example is India’s 2014 Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana (PMJDY) 

scheme, aimed at promoting financial inclusion by allowing each household at least one bank 

account. PMJDY is considered one of the biggest financial inclusion initiatives worldwide, 

opening 18,096,130 bank accounts in just one week (Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana website).

Technologies can enhance access to health services, improve the response to individual 

and community needs, and improve delivery of a wide range of health services. In 2013, 

Thailand announced an ambitious plan to produce medical robots, spurred by its desire to 

become Asia’s health care hub (Praiwan, 2013). Robots dispensing pharmaceuticals at Siriraj 



The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 67 

Hospital aim to improve patient safety and speed services. Bangkok’s Ramathibodi Hospital 

reportedly conducted the first robotically assisted brain surgery in Asia. New technology 

can also help alleviate labor shortages in rural areas. For example, in Bangkok there is one 

doctor for every 850 people, whereas in the country’s rural northeast there is one for every 

5,308 people. Thailand is trying to meet demand for health services using digital technology. 

Innovative applications like the AorSorMor Online app connect primary health care units with 

“Village Health Volunteers” to collect timely information and provide peer support and health 

monitoring in remote areas (AorSorMor Online webpage). Lastly, the government plans to 

integrate its public health system with digitized personal health records. This will allow both 

professionals and patients to access information, monitor progress, seek advice, and make 

appointments with a doctor online.

Digital technology can help improve the quality of public education. The Philippines 

is using digital technology to improve the quality of public goods such as education by 

leveraging the use of social media. For example, Checkmyschool (CMS) is a community 

monitoring tool that uses technology to motivate government responsiveness. While CMS 

began as an experimental partnership with the Department of Education in 2011, it now 

provides third-party monitoring of specific government programs on education delivered 

directly to schools. It partners with various network organizations to mobilize, train, and 

deploy citizen monitors in different parts of the country. For instance, CMS is used to 

crowdsource reports on the poor quality of toilets in public schools. This has resulted in a 

prompt government response to inspect and then fund repairs to improve the facilities.



68 | Chapter 3

References

ADB (Asian Development Bank). 2017. Aid for Trade in Asia and the 

Pacific: Promoting Connectivity for Inclusive Development. Manila: 

Asian Development Bank.

________. 2018. Asian Development Outlook: How Technology Affects 

Jobs. Manila: Asian Development Bank.

AorSorMor Online. http://www.ais.co.th/aorsormor/en/.

Asia Pacific Foundation of Canada. 2017. 2017 Survey of 

Entrepreneurs and MSMEs in Viet Nam: Building the Capacity of 

MSMEs through Technology and Innovation. https://apfcanada-

msme.ca (accessed March 14, 2018).

Autor, D., and D. Dorn. 2013. “The Growth of Low-Skill Service Jobs 

and the Polarization of the US Labor Market”. American Economic 

Review 103 (5): 1553–97.

Chadha, R. 2016. Social Commerce Counts for 30% of Digital Sales 

in Southeast Asia. https://www.emarketer.com/Article/Social-

Commerce-Counts-30-of-Digital-Sales-Southeast-Asia/1014830 

(accessed March 13, 2018).

Chang, J. H., G. Rynhart, and P. Huynh. 2016. ASEAN in 

Transformation: How Technology Is Changing Jobs and 

Enterprises. Bureau for Employers’ Activities Working Paper 10, 

International Labour Organization. 

Hindu, The. 2017. Aadhaar Covers 99% of Adults in India: Prasad. 

January 27. http://www.thehindu.com/business/Aadhaar-covers-

99-of-adults-in-India-Prasad/article17104609.ece.

India, Unique Identification Authority of India. Aadhaar 

Authentication. https://uidai.gov.in/authentication/

authentication-overview/authentication-en.html (accessed March 

12, 2018).

International Trade Center. 2017. New Pathways to E-Commerce: A 

Global MSME Competitiveness Survey. Geneva.

JakPat. 2015. Indonesian Online Seller Survey Report. Jajak Pendapat 

App (blog), March 9. https://blog.jakpat.net/indonesian-online-

seller-survey-report/ (accessed March 15, 2018).

Klemp, S. 2017. Digital in Southeast Asia in 2017. We Are Social (blog), 

February 16. https://wearesocial.com/special-reports/digital-

southeast-asia-2017 (accessed March 15, 2018).

Llamas, C. 2017. Who’s Winning the Philippines’ E-Commerce Arena: 

Local or International Players? http://www.marketing-interactive.

com/whos-winning-the-philippines-e-commerce-arena-local-or-

international-players/ (accessed March 15, 2018).

Malabuppha, T. 2017. Thailand E-Commerce Market: What to Expect 

in 2017. https://www.pricezagroup.com/2017/thailand-e-

commerce-market-expect/ (accessed March 15, 2018).

McKinsey Global Institute. 2016. Digital Globalization: The New Era of 

Global Flows. New York: McKinsey & Company.

_______. _2017. Jobs Lost, Jobs Gained: Workforce Transitions in a 

Time of Automation. McKinsey & Company. 

McMillan, M., D. Rodrik, and I. Verduzco-Gallo. 2014. Globalization, 

Structural Change, and Productivity Growth, with an Update on 

Africa. World Development 63: 11–32.

Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana. https://pmjdy.gov.in/about.

Praiwan, Y. 2013. Thailand’s Robot Revolution Is Rising. Bangkok 

Post, April 23. https://www.bangkokpost.com/tech/local-

news/346542/thailand-robot-revolution-is-rising (accessed 

March 15, 2018).

http://www.ais.co.th/aorsormor/en/
https://apfcanada-msme.ca
https://apfcanada-msme.ca
https://www.emarketer.com/Article/Social-Commerce-Counts-30-of-Digital-Sales-Southeast-Asia/1014830
https://www.emarketer.com/Article/Social-Commerce-Counts-30-of-Digital-Sales-Southeast-Asia/1014830
http://www.thehindu.com/business/Aadhaar-covers-99-of-adults-in-India-Prasad/article17104609.ece
http://www.thehindu.com/business/Aadhaar-covers-99-of-adults-in-India-Prasad/article17104609.ece
https://uidai.gov.in/authentication/authentication-overview/authentication-en.html
https://uidai.gov.in/authentication/authentication-overview/authentication-en.html
https://blog.jakpat.net/indonesian-online-seller-survey-report/
https://blog.jakpat.net/indonesian-online-seller-survey-report/
https://wearesocial.com/special-reports/digital-southeast-asia-2017
https://wearesocial.com/special-reports/digital-southeast-asia-2017
http://www.marketing-interactive.com/whos-winning-the-philippines-e-commerce-arena-local-or-internat
http://www.marketing-interactive.com/whos-winning-the-philippines-e-commerce-arena-local-or-internat
http://www.marketing-interactive.com/whos-winning-the-philippines-e-commerce-arena-local-or-internat
https://www.pricezagroup.com/2017/thailand-e-commerce-market-expect/
https://www.pricezagroup.com/2017/thailand-e-commerce-market-expect/
https://pmjdy.gov.in/about
https://www.bangkokpost.com/tech/local-news/346542/thailand-robot-revolution-is-rising
https://www.bangkokpost.com/tech/local-news/346542/thailand-robot-revolution-is-rising


The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 69 

PricewaterhouseCoopers. 2016. They Say They Want a Revolution: 

Total Retail 2016. https://www.pwc.com/gx/en/retail-consumer/

publications/assets/total-retail-global-report.pdf (accessed 

March 15, 2018).

Singh, M. 2017. “99% of Indians over 18 Now Have Aadhaar Cards”. 

The Times of India, January 28. https://timesofindia.indiatimes.

com/india/99-of-indians-over-18-now-have-aadhaar/

articleshow/56820818.cms.

Statista. 2018. The Statistics Portal. https://www.statista.com/

statistics/268136/top-15-countries-based-on-number-of-

facebook-users/ (accessed March 15, 2018).

World Bank. PovcalNet Database. Washington, DC.

________. World Development Indicators. Washington, DC.

https://www.pwc.com/gx/en/retail-consumer/publications/assets/total-retail-global-report.pdf
https://www.pwc.com/gx/en/retail-consumer/publications/assets/total-retail-global-report.pdf
https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/99-of-indians-over-18-now-have-aadhaar/articleshow/5682081
https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/99-of-indians-over-18-now-have-aadhaar/articleshow/5682081
https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/99-of-indians-over-18-now-have-aadhaar/articleshow/5682081
https://www.statista.com/statistics/268136/top-15-countries-based-on-number-of-facebook-users/
https://www.statista.com/statistics/268136/top-15-countries-based-on-number-of-facebook-users/
https://www.statista.com/statistics/268136/top-15-countries-based-on-number-of-facebook-users/


70 | Chapter 4



The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 71 

Chapter 4
The Future 
of Work in 
Emerging Europe, 
Central Asia, 
and Southern 
and Eastern 
Mediterranean

The regions where the European Bank for Reconstruction 
and Development (EBRD) operates span Central, Eastern and 
South-Eastern Europe, Southern and Eastern Mediterranean, 
Central Asia, Mongolia and Turkey. The demographic profiles 
and challenges faced by Emerging Europe are quite different 
from the ones facing Southern and Eastern Mediterranean and 
Central Asia, and will require different policies and solutions. 
The future of work in these diverse regions will be shaped by 
the interplay of trends in demography and technology as well 
as the way education and social protection respond to these 
trends. Technological advances present formidable policy 
challenges, but also create opportunities to mitigate 
the adverse impact of the region’s demography. 

Populations are aging and birth rates are falling in many 
emerging markets, but this demographic transition is
 much further advanced in Emerging Europe. Conversely, 
the “youth bulge” demographic profile of Southern and 
Eastern Mediterranean and parts of Central Asia 
makes job creation particularly challenging. 



72 | Chapter 4

Emerging Europe benefited strongly from the earlier wave of technological 
change through capital inflows and integration into global value chains. Today 

the EBRD regions enjoy relatively high rates of penetration of digital technologies 
compared with other emerging markets. 

The impact of the next wave of technological change may be different. Strong 
incentives for automation are already evident in Central Europe, the share of 

medium-skilled occupations has been declining, and the labor share of income 
has been trending downward. The regions’ deficit of governance relative to their 

per capita income levels may constrain the effectiveness of policy response to 
change in the workplace.

 
The distributional impact of technology has been further compounded by wage 

decompression in the transition from centrally planned to market economies, 
leading to a pronounced rise in inequality and strong and growing support for 

populism. If these trends are ignored, populism may undermine countries’ long-term 
economic growth and weaken democratic institutions–further feeding populism. 
Given these pressures, the region faces the challenge of retooling education and 

social protection systems and leveraging technology to improve transparency, 
improve the efficiency of government services, and strengthen governance. 



The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 73 

The EBRD Regions’ Unique 
and Varied Demography 
Populations are aging and birth rates are falling in most 

emerging markets, but this demographic transition is 

much further advanced in Emerging Europe. The speed of 

population aging, reflected in increasing old-age dependency 

ratio–the ratio of those aged 65 and above to the working-

age population–is virtually identical to that of advanced 

European economies (Figure 4.1). And in terms of levels of 

old-age dependency, Central Europe and the Baltic States 

are only about five years behind the advanced economies 

of the euro area. Both the level of old-age dependency ratio 

and the speed of increase are higher than in the United 

States. South-Eastern Europe, in turn, is around ten years 

behind Central Europe in its demographic transition. On 

current trends, the working-age population of Central and 

South-Eastern Europe is expected to shrink by 13.4 percent 

by 2040; trends are broadly similar in Eastern Europe.

Pe
rc

en
t

Japan

Euro area-11
CEB
SEE

USA
China

G20 Emerging markets

Figure 4.1 Old-age Dependency Ratio 
In Emerging Europe, the population is aging and the working-age population is shrinking at high rates.

Source: UN (2017) World Bank (2018a), and authors’ calculations.

Note: The old-age dependency ratio is the ratio of population aged 65 and above to those aged 15–64. Projections are based on the median scenario. CEB 

(Central Europe and the Baltic States) = Croatia, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Slovak Republic, and Slovenia. SEE (South-Eastern Europe) = 

Albania; Bosnia and Herzegovina; Bulgaria; Cyprus; Greece; Kosovo; FYR Macedonia; Montenegro; Romania; and Serbia. Euro Area-11 = Austria, Belgium, 

Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Portugal, and Spain. G20 emerging markets = Argentina, Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, 

Korea, Mexico, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, and Turkey. 



74 | Chapter 4

In many economies these trends have been 

compounded by significant emigration, primarily to the 

higher-income member states of the European Union (EU). 

High emigration from the new EU member states following 

their integration into the EU single market has been unique. 

It has also been remarkably widespread across all skill 

levels (Atoyan et al., 2016). 

These trends have put significant upward pressures 

on wages in the region, weighing on the economies’ 

competitiveness as parts of integrated European value 

chains. In addition, hollowing out of labor markets has made 

it increasingly difficult for some countries to achieve the 

critical mass of skills and expertise in specific areas that 

is required for successful development of new—and old— 

sectors of the economy. 

The picture in Southern and Eastern Mediterranean, 

Turkey, and parts of Central Asia is very different, with low 

and slowly increasing old-age dependency ratios (Figure 

4.2) and relatively high fertility rates. At the same time, 

life expectancy in these economies has been improving. 

Turkey

SEMED

India
Central Asia

Nigeria

Source: UN (2017); World Bank (2018a); authors’ calculations.

Note: The old-age dependency ratio is the ratio of population aged 65 and above to those aged 15–64. Projections are based on the median scenario. 

SEMED (Southern and Eastern Mediterranean) = Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon, Morocco, and Tunisia. Central Asia = Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz Republic, Mongolia, 

Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan.

Figure 4.2 Old-age Dependency Ratio, Selected Countries 
Meanwhile, in Southern and Eastern Mediterranean and Turkey, low and slowly increasing old-age 

dependency ratios and higher fertility rates are creating a “youth bulge,” with many new entrants into 

the labor market every year.

25

23

21

19

17

15

13

11

9

7

5



The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 75 

This presents a formidable challenge of dealing with the 

demographic “youth bulge”: that is, creating both the right 

quantity and quality of jobs for a large number of new 

entrants into the labor market every year. This challenge is 

distinct from Emerging Europe’s and similar to that faced by 

South Asia’s economies.

Technological Change and Its Impact
Emerging Europe has benefited strongly from advances in 

transportation and telecommunications (Georgiev, Nagy-

Mohacsi, and Plekhanov, 2017). These advances have 

enabled rapid development of global value chains (Figure 

4.3), facilitated foreign direct investment (FDI), and created 

conditions for offshoring of jobs from advanced economies 

(see Baldwin, 2016, and Blinder, 2009). High FDI and non-

FDI capital flows from the core European economies before 

2008 (averaging 9 percent of GDP per year) supported 

income growth of the middle class and reduced emigration 

to other EU member states. Many jobs were created in 

manufacturing assembly, with some higher-paid jobs in 

research and development (R&D) hubs of multinationals 

(EBRD, 2014). 

Source: OECD and WTO (2016).

Note: Emerging Asia = Cambodia, China, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand, and Vietnam. Latin America = Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, 

Costa Rica, Mexico, and Peru. Global sample comprises 63 advanced economies and emerging markets.

Figure 4.3 Shares of Exports that Are Part of a Global Value Chain
Development of global value chains has been very rapid in the EBRD region.



76 | Chapter 4

As a result, the economies enjoyed rapid growth of total 

factor productivity (TFP) during the period 1998–2008, 

well above levels observed in other emerging markets or 

in advanced economies. TFP growth refers to the residual 

economic growth that cannot be attributed to changes in 

factors of production such as capital stock, labor, or human 

capital. It reflects the efficiency with which these other 

factors of production are combined to produce a final output. 

Rapid improvements in TFP during the pre-crisis years were 

aided by relatively high levels of existing capital stock and 

human capital, which were used relatively inefficiently under 

central planning. Once the TFP catch-up potential was 

exhausted, TFP growth in the region has slowed markedly.

The penetration of digital technologies in EBRD regions 

has been high compared with other emerging markets and 

is growing. The rate of broadband penetration increased 

markedly between 2005 and 2015 to 59 percent on average–

above the average rate for large emerging markets, although 

somewhat below the levels seen in advanced economies 

(Figure 4.4). E-commerce is estimated to account for about 

4.3 percent of retail sales in Poland, a level similar to Spain 

or Italy.

The next wave of technological advances (the sharing 

economy and the increased use of artificial intelligence) will 

reduce the demand for outsourcing jobs in manufacturing 

and tradeable services because these can instead be 

automated in higher-income economies (Autor, Levy, and 

Murnane, 2003). A limited number of jobs may even get 

reshored (Stentoft et al., 2016). 

As the labor force in Emerging Europe shrinks and labor 

costs rise, the incentives to automate jobs may become 

stronger than in other emerging markets. In fact, automation 

largely explains why historically the link between adverse 

demographic trends and countries’ per capita growth 

performance has been weak or nonexistent (Acemoglu and 

Restrepo, 2017a). Based on the calculations in the World 

Bank’s World Development Report 2016 on the digital divide, 

in a number of countries in the EBRD regions including 

Albania, Croatia, Cyprus, Latvia, Lithuania, and Romania, 

the share of employment that can be automated within 

the foreseeable future is close to the OECD average of 56 

percent (World Bank, 2016). McKinsey Global Institute (2017) 

similarly estimates the corresponding share at around 50 

percent in Russia.

As of today, the penetration rates of robots in Hungary, 

Poland, Slovenia, and the Slovak Republic are similar to 

those in advanced economies and are well above the rates 

seen in Brazil, China, India, and South Africa (UNCTAD, 2017). 

At present, robots are primarily deployed in the automotive 

sector, electronics, appliances, chemicals, and machinery and 

equipment, but may become widely used in other sectors in 

the future. The technological advances that drive automation 

may help reduce upward pressure on wages and maintain 

economies’ competitiveness, albeit potentially at a cost of 

lower employment rates (Acemoglu and Restrepo, 2017b). 

A word of caution is in order when extrapolating into the 

future the finding that technology has so far offset the impact 

of adverse demographics on average growth. Countries 

exposed to rapid aging thus far have been predominantly 

advanced economies with strong governance, relatively high 

social cohesion, and an enabling skills mix (notably Japan). 

The economies in Emerging Europe that are “getting old 

before they can get rich” will face additional challenges in 

reaping the growth-enhancing potential of automation. And 



The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 77 

Source: World Bank (2018a).

Note: EA-11 (Euro area-11) = Austria, Belgium, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Portugal, and Spain. G20 EM (emerging 

markets) = Argentina, Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, Korea, Mexico, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, and Turkey.

Figure 4.4 Share of Households with Broadband Internet Access 
The penetration of digital technologies has been high in the EBRD regions compared with other emerging markets.

2015

2005



78 | Chapter 4

if their governance is weak, then they will have limited capability 

for effective and inclusive policy responses to these challenges. 

Many countries in the EBRD regions are experiencing a “deficit 

of governance” in a sense that their levels of economic and 

political institutions remain below what could be expected 

given their levels of income per capita (Figure 4.5). In these 

cases, multilateral development banks have an important role 

to play in supporting institution building.

The Risk of Populism and 
Perspectives for Inclusion 
As in the advanced economies, the hollowing of the middle 

in the EBRD region’s labor market has been associated 

with the rise of populist politicians and reversals in sound 

economic reforms. If the median voter is increasingly 

employed in a lower-paid lower-skilled job for which he or 

she is overqualified, the foundations of democratic decision 

making may crumble. This risk is exacerbated in those 

countries where an inflow of migrants leads to perceptions 

of intensified competition for low-paid service jobs and 

downward pressures on wages. 

In parts of the EBRD regions, the distributional impact 

of technological change has been compounded by another 

trend: the transition from the highly compressed wages 

of the central planning period to the wages determined by 

the market. As a result, inequality has increased especially 

greatly in economies in Emerging Europe since the start of 

the transition from socialism (EBRD, 2016). High average 

economic growth notwithstanding, only around 44 percent 

of the population is estimated to have experienced income 

growth above the average growth in the G7 economies 



The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 79 

Figure 4.5 Governance in Relation to per Capita Income
For many economies in the EBRD regions, governance remains relatively weak given their levels of per capita income.

Source: World Bank (2018b); IMF (2017); authors’ calculations.

Note: The average of indicators of control of corruption, rule of law, government effectiveness, and regulatory quality. Calculations based 

on 2016 or the latest data point available. “Other” comprises 138 advanced and developing economies for which data are available. 



80 | Chapter 4

(Figure 4.6). Furthermore, parental background has become 

an increasingly important predictor of an individual’s 

education in the EBRD regions (gender, place of birth, and 

ethnicity also have considerable explanatory power) (EBRD, 

2016), amplifying the effects of inequality of opportunity 

on lifetime economic outcomes. With automation, existing 

spheres of inequality risk becoming further entrenched.

In addition, the polarization of jobs has been increasing 

in Emerging Europe since the mid-1990s, labor force 

Figure 4.6 Share of Population with Income Growth above/below the G7 Average, 1989–2016
As inequality has increased in Emerging Europe and Central Asia, less than half the population has experienced income growth above the 

average growth in the G7 economies.

surveys suggest. In particular, the share of medium-skilled 

occupations has been declining while the shares of low-

skilled and high-skilled occupations have been rising. Job 

polarization is increasing both within and across industries, 

at a pace similar to that in higher-income European countries 

(Figure 4.7 and OECD, 2017). Recent evidence also points to 

job polarization in Egypt (Helmy, 2015). The share of national 

income accruing to workers in the form of wages and 

salaries (the so-called labor share of income) in the EBRD 

Source: EBRD (2016). 

Note: Data for each percentile are based on linear extrapolation of averages 

for each decile.



The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 81 

Figure 4.7 Change in the Share of Employment by Skill Level, 2006−16 
Medium-skilled jobs have been decreasing at the expense of high- and low-skilled jobs in Emerging Europe.

G
re

ec
e C
yp

ru
s

C
ro

at
ia

La
tv

ia

B
ul

ga
ri

a

Li
th

ua
ni

a

Eu
ro

 a
re

a 
- 

11

Tu
rk

ey

Sl
ov

en
ia

Po
la

nd

H
un

ga
ry

Es
to

ni
a

Ro
m

an
ia

FY
R 

M
ac

ed
on

ia

10

5

0

-5

-10

Pe
rc

en
ta

ge
 p

oi
nt

s

Medium-skilled

High- and low-skilled

Source: OECD (2017); Eurostat (2018); authors’ calculations.

Note: Jobs are classified under the International Standard Classification of Occupations 08 major groups. High-skilled occupations comprise managers, 

professionals, technicians and associate professionals (groups 1–3). Medium-skilled occupations comprise clerks, craft and related trades workers, and 

plant and machine operators and assemblers (groups 4, 7 and 8). Low-skilled occupations comprise service and sales workers (group 5) and elementary 

occupations (group 9). Agriculture and armed forces are excluded (groups 0 and 6). Euro Area-11 is the simple average of the values for Austria, Belgium, 

Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Portugal, and Spain. 

Sl
ov

ak
 R

ep
.



82 | Chapter 4

1.  Populist movements can be thought of as movements that defend “interests of the people” against the elites or other minority groups. Populists 

typically view economic and political institutions as unnecessary restraints subverting the will of the people. See Rodrik (forthcoming). 

Figure 4.8 Change in Labor Share of Income, 1994-2017
The labor share of income has been declining in many countries in the regions.

Source: ILO (2018); Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014); and authors’ calculations.

Note: The International Labour Organization data is spliced with the data from Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014) using the annual rate of change reported in 

each source.  Advanced economies refers to the simple average of values for Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, 

Germany, Italy, Japan, Korea, Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United States.

K
az

ak
hs

ta
n C
ro

at
ia

Po
la

nd

Sl
ov

en
ia

M
ac

ed
on

ia
, F

Y
R

Es
to

ni
a

A
ze

rb
ai

ja
n

M
on

go
lia

M
ol

do
va

Tu
rk

ey

EB
R

D
 re

gi
on

s 
(a

ve
ra

ge
)

G
re

ec
e

Li
th

ua
ni

a

Ad
va

nc
ed

 e
co

no
m

ie
s

C
yp

ru
s

Ru
ss

ia

Sl
ov

ak
 R

ep
ub

lic

La
tv

ia

B
ul

ga
ri

a

U
kr

ai
ne

15

10

5

0

-5

-10

-15

-20

Pe
rc

en
ta

ge
 p

oi
nt

s

regions has declined by around 4 percentage points since 

the mid-1990s. This represents a greater average decrease 

than in advanced economies (Figure 4.8) as in advanced 

economies, much of the long-term decline in labor share of 

income happened before the mid-1990s (IMF, 2017).

Fed by the rapidly rising income and wealth inequality, 

populism in the region was strong in the 1990s and 2000s 

and has been gaining further momentum. Even the countries 

with a strong track-record of growth have not been immune 

to populism.1 If these trends are ignored, populism and 



The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 83 

Figure 4.9 Education Levels in Relation to per capita Income
Levels of formal education are high relative to the per capita income of countries in the EBRD regions.

Source: Barro and Lee (2013); IMF (2017); and authors’ calculations.

Note: Based on the data for 2016 or the latest year available. Education levels are measured as average years of schooling. “Other” category comprises 116 

advanced and developing economies outside the EBRD regions for which data are available.

short-termism in economic policy setting may create a 

vicious cycle, undermine countries’ long-term economic 

growth and weaken their democratic institutions, in some 

cases risking de-democratization.

Income per capita at purchasing power parity, US$, log scale

Ye
ar

s 
of

 s
ch

oo
lin

g

12

14

10

8

6

4

2

0
500 1,000 2,000 4,000 8,000 16,000 32,000

Like other emerging markets, the EBRD regions face the 

challenge of retooling their education and social protection 

systems. At present, the regions enjoy high levels of formal 

education relative to their per capita income (Figure 4.9). 



84 | Chapter 4

This puts it in a strong position to excel at life-long learning, 

the key feature of the changing nature of work. Importantly, 

efforts are needed to leverage private sector participation in 

designing retraining programs and defining their curricula. 

Yet high levels of formal education also increase the risk that 

workers will feel overqualified for their new occupations if 

job polarization accelerates. 

On the positive side, technology can help increase 

government efficiency and transparency in the areas of 

education provision and social protection, and beyond. 

In a region characterized by a shortfall of governance 

relative to its level of economic development, such 

technological change may help harness additional growth 

dividends stemming from improved accountability and 

reduced corruption. Examples of such initiatives include 

the comprehensive e-government platform in Estonia and 

enhanced transparency in public procurement in Ukraine. 

Conclusion
For decades, technological change boosted income 

convergence in emerging markets and the demographic 

dividend further supported growth and strengthened 

fiscal positions. Recently, the landscape has been rapidly 

changing, with labor forces no longer growing and 

medium-skilled occupations being increasingly at risk of 

automation. 

Emerging Europe finds itself at the forefront of the 

demographic transition in emerging markets, while countries 

in Southern and Eastern Mediterranean and Central Asia, 

Mongolia and Turkey face the challenge of creating a large 

number of quality jobs every year. 

How the future of work will evolve under these 

circumstances will crucially depend on the policy response 

in the areas of education, social safety nets, fiscal policy, 

and the strengthening of economic and political institutions.



The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 85 



86 | Chapter 4

References 

Acemoglu, D., and P. Restrepo. 2017a. Secular Stagnation? The Effect 

of Aging on Economic Growth in the Age of Automation. American 

Economic Review 107 (5): 374-79.

---------. 2017b. Robots and Jobs: Evidence from US Labor Markets. 

NBER Working Paper 23285, National Bureau of Economic 

Research, Cambridge, MA.

Atoyan, R., L. Christiansen, A. Dizioli, C. Ebeke, N. Ilahi, A. Ilyina, G. 

Mehrez, H. Qu, F. Raei, A. Rhee, and D. Zakharova. 2016. Emigration 

and Its Impact on Eastern Europe. IMF Staff Discussion Note 16/07, 

International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.

Autor, D. 2015. Why Are There Still So Many Jobs? The History 

and Future of Workplace Automation. Journal of Economic 

Perspectives 29 (3): 3-30.

Autor, D., F. Levy, and R. Murnane. 2003. The Skill Content of Recent 

Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration. Quarterly Journal 

of Economics 118 (4): 1279-1333.

Baldwin, R. 2016. The Great Convergence. Information Technology 

and the New Globalization. Harvard University Press. 

Barro, R., and J. W. Lee. 2013. A New Data Set of Educational 

Attainment in the World, 1950-2010. Journal of Development 

Economics 104 (September): 184-98.

Blinder, A. 2009. How Many US Jobs Might Be Offshorable? World 

Economics 10 (2): 41-78.

EBRD (European Bank for Reconstruction and Development). 2014. 

Innovation in Transition. Transition Report 2014. EBRD.

---------. 2016. Transition for All: Equal Opportunities in an Unequal 

World. Transition Report 2016-17. EBRD.

---------. 2017. Sustaining Growth. Transition Report 2017-18. EBRD.

Eurostat. 2018. Labour Force Survey. http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/

data/database. Last access March 2018. 

Georgiev, Y., P. Nagy-Mohacsi, and A. Plekhanov. 2017. Structural 

Reform and Productivity Growth in Emerging Europe and Central 

Asia. Working Paper 523, Asian Development Bank. 

Helmy, O. 2015. Skill Demand Polarization in Egypt. Middle East 

Development Journal 7 (1): 26-48.

IIF (Institute of International Finance). 2017. Capital Flows Tracker.

https://www.iif.com/publications/capital-flows-tracker. Last 

access March 2018. 

ILO (International Labor Organization). 2018. ILOSTAT. http://www.ilo.

org/ilostat/. Last access March 2018. 

IMF (International Monetary Fund). 2017. Seeking Sustainable 

Recovery. World Economic Outlook, October. Washington, DC: IMF.

Karabarbounis, L., and B. Neiman. 2014. The Global Decline of the 

Labor Share. Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (1): 61-103.

McKinsey Global Institute. 2017. A Future that Works: Automation, 

Employment and Productivity. McKinsey Global Institute Report.

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). 

2017. OECD Employment Outlook 2017. Directorate of Employment, 

Labour, and Social Affairs, OECD.

OECD and WTO (Organization for Economic Co-operation and 

Development and World Trade Organization). 2016. Trade in Value-

Added Database. http://www.oecd.org/sti/ind/measuring-trade-

in-value-added.htm. Last access March 2018.

http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/data/database
http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/data/database
https://www.iif.com/publications/capital-flows-tracker
http://www.ilo.org/ilostat/
http://www.ilo.org/ilostat/


The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 87 

Rodrik, D. Forthcoming. Is Populism Necessarily Bad Economics? 

American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings (1, May 

2018). 

Stentoft, J., J. Olhager, J. Heikkila, and L. Thomas. 2016. 

Manufacturing Backshoring: A Systematic Literature Review. 

Operations Management Research 9: 53-61.

UN (United Nations) 2017. “World Population Prospects. The 2017 

Revision, Key Findings and Advance Tables”. Working Paper No. 

ESA/P/WP/248, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, 

Population Division.

UNCTAD (United Nations Conference on Trade and Development). 

2017. Beyond Austerity. Towards a Global New Deal. Trade and 

Development Report 2017. Geneva: UNCTAD.

World Bank. 2016. Digital Dividends. World Development Report 2016. 

Washington, DC: World Bank.

---------. 2018a. World Development Indicators. http://databank.

worldbank.org/. Last access March 2018. 

---------. 2018b. Worldwide Governance Indicators. http://info.

worldbank.org/governance/wgi/#home. Last access March 2018.

http://databank.worldbank.org/
http://databank.worldbank.org/
http://info.worldbank.org/governance/wgi/#home
http://info.worldbank.org/governance/wgi/#home


88 | Chapter 5



The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 89 

Chapter 5
The Future of 
Work in Latin 
America and the 
Caribbean 

Information and communication technologies (ICTs) in 
Latin America and the Caribbean are a relatively untapped 
opportunity that could improve the region’s productivity.
However, ICTs are expanding at a slower rate than in 
developed countries. Informal employment has been 
traditionally identified as a long-lasting challenge for Latin 
America and the Caribbean. Digital technologies combined 
with other trends in labor markets may provide new job 
opportunities and change the nature of informality.

The demographic trends that fueled the region’s economic 
growth in the past are starting to reverse. Decreased 
population growth, combined with longer life expectancies, 
will add pressure to social security systems.



90 | Chapter 5

Latin America and the Caribbean must act decisively to take advantage of the 
upcoming opportunities from technological advancements while minimizing 

its risks. Public-private partnerships will have to be developed in three fronts: 
(1) investing in skills for everyone by adapting a system designed to transmit 

knowledge from an early age to one that allows people to learn throughout 
their lives; (2) supporting workers as they transition to new jobs and new skills 

including by creating and refining digital platforms to let workers identify and 
find job opportunities and undertake training; and (3) rethinking the welfare state  

because social security systems must adapt to a new digital reality and future 
demographic changes.

1.  Digital potential is defined in terms of a country’s level of digitalization in its leading sectors (see Khanna et al., 2015).

Trends
Information and communication technologies (ICTs) are expanding in Latin America and the 

Caribbean, although closing the gap with other regions remains a challenge. ICT development 

and penetration are lower in the region than in the developed world. Latin American and the 

Caribbean takes advantage of only about 6 percent of its digital potential,1 compared to an 

average of 12 percent in Europe and 18 percent in the United States (Bughin et al., 2017). 

Similarly, broadband development is lower; the region scored 4.28 in the 2016 Broadband 

Development Index, whereas member countries of the Organisation of Economic Co-

operation and Development (OECD), excluding Chile and Mexico, averaged 6.12 (García and 

Iglesias, 2017). These statistics reflect the region’s slow pace of ICT development. In terms of 

personal, business, and government adoption of ICTs, Latin America and the Caribbean scores 

considerably lower than the subgroup of advanced economies, and lags Emerging Asia and 

Europe, and the Middle East, North Africa and Pakistan (Baller, Dutta, and Lanvin, 2016). 



The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 91 

In addition, ICT access across the region varies 

considerably by country. For instance, broadband 

development is higher in the Southern Cone countries than 

the Caribbean countries.2 By 2014, 67 percent of Uruguay’s 

households had a personal computer, whereas this figure 

was 32 percent for Peru and 21 percent for Honduras. Internet 

access is less extended, with Uruguay again leading with 57 

percent, followed closely by Chile, Argentina, and Brazil, at 

53 percent, 52 percent, and 48 percent, respectively. Bolivia, 

Nicaragua, and Haiti trail the list, with values ranging between 

17 percent and 4 percent (Baller, Dutta, and Lanvin, 2016). 

Latin America and the Caribbean is increasingly 

connected, with ICTs starting to unleash their potential 

across the region’s economy. Smartphone adoption has 

increased drastically and is expected to increase from 59 

percent in 2016 to 71 percent by 2020, ahead of the global 

average of 66 percent. Coverage has also increased sharply: 

mobile operators cover roughly 70 percent of the region’s 

territory. 4G coverage is accelerating as well, doubling 

in 2016. This expansion is meaningful economically: 1.7 

million workers were working in the mobile ecosystem in 

Latin America and the Caribbean by 2016 (GSMA, 2017).3

Increased connectivity and ease of access implies 

that Latin America and the Caribbean’s digital economy is 

beginning to develop, starting with digital platforms and 

services. A few examples: 60 million people have LinkedIn 

profiles, while there are 100 million Facebook accounts 

in Brazil alone. In Mexico, 35 million electronic receipts 

are generated daily (Ivanschitz and Korn, 2017). Digital 

platforms also open doors for entrepreneurship: besides 

international platforms such as Uber, Cabify, and Airbnb, 

there has been a surge of locally developed digital services, 

such as Tappsi (Colombia) for taxis, Arriendas (Chile) for 

car rentals, Fondeadora (Mexico) and Catarse (Brazil) for 

crowdsourcing, and Aliada (Mexico) for domestic services 

(Sundararajan, 2017). 

Tecnolatinas (the name given to Latin America and 

the Caribbean’s technology enterprises) make up a 

varied ecosystem with more than 5000 firms worth $37.7 

billion. Argentina and Brazil account for 66 percent of the 

Tecnolatinas, while 29 percent are in Chile, Colombia, and 

Mexico. In addition, Latin America and the Caribbean has 

nine “unicorns”: start-up companies worth more than $1 

billion (Surfing Tsunamis and Nxtp.Labs, 2017). 

Firms taking advantage of new technologies seem to 

benefit from the comparative advantage they provide. A 

survey done by the Boston Consulting Group in five countries 

(including Brazil) found that small and medium enterprises 

using cloud computing grew almost twice as much as those 

that did not. Cloud technology’s scalability and flexibility 

allow firms to compete with bigger competitors, regardless 

of location. Wider adoption of cloud technologies has 

created 2.7 million jobs in Brazil, and increased GDP by $120 

billion, Aggarwal et al. (2013) estimate. “Technology spaces” 

2.  Similarly, in the Networked Readiness Index of the World Economic Forum, Chile ranks first in the region (38th in the global ranking), whereas Haiti is 

137th (out of 140). See Baller, Dutta, and Lanvin (2016).

3.   A “mobile ecosystem” consists of a collection of goods and services offered by mobile devices companies (device hardware, operating systems, 

applications, and user accounts.



92 | Chapter 5

4.  This calculation follows Frey and Osborne (2017).

5.   Around 53 percent of time spent working in Colombia and Peru, and around 50 percent of time in Argentina, Brazil, Chile, and Mexico could be automated. 

See Bughin et al. (2017).

with great untapped potential for Latin America and the 

Caribbean include fintech, agtech, artificial intelligence and 

automation, synthetic biology, renewable energies, virtual 

reality, and the Internet of Things.

Automation puts some workers’ jobs at risk. The 

penetration of robots has negative effects on employment 

and wages, Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017) find. The 

more developed the country, the smaller the percentage 

of occupations at risk of automation, Micco and Soler 

(forthcoming) note (Figure 5.1). In Argentina and Uruguay, 

approximately two-thirds of the occupations that currently 

exist risk being replaced by currently available technologies 

(Aboal and Zunino, 2017).4 Overall, Latin American and 

Caribbean workers spend around half of their time in tasks 

that could be automated.5 

Nevertheless, automation is happening more slowly in 

the region than in developed countries. The density of robots 

(the number of industrial robots per 100 manufacturing 

Figure 5.1 The Percent of Occupations at High Risk of Automation
The region is at an early stage of developing automation. 

Source: Micco and Soler (forthcoming). 

0.90

0.85

0.80

0.75

0.70

0.65

0.60

0.55

0.50

0.45

6.0 6.5 7.0 7.5 8.0 8.5 9.0 9.5 10.0 10.5 11.0

World

Latin America and the Caribbean

Linear (World)Ri
sk

 o
f a

ut
om

at
io

n

Log GDP per capita



The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 93 

workers) is lower in Latin American and Caribbean countries 

than in other regions (Nübler, 2017). Density is highest in 

Mexico, with a value near 0.1, compared to a value near 

1 in most developed countries by 2014. To date, vehicle 

production and the chemical and plastic industries have 

taken the lead in incorporating robots, comprising 70 percent 

and 15 percent of the robot stock in the region, respectively. 

Regional features, such as the abundance of cheap labor or 

legal frameworks that restrict the adoption of technology, 

could be playing a role in this phenomenon.

There is a growing body of academic work relating the 

increasing usage of new technologies with labor market 

polarization.6 Regardless, there is little evidence of labor 

market polarization in Latin America and the Caribbean. By 

using region-specific skill/task information on occupations 

(the STEP survey for Bolivia, Colombia, and El Salvador), 

Messina, Oviedo and Pica (forthcoming) look for evidence of 

job polarization in Latin American and Caribbean countries. 

The authors find some evidence of employment polarization 

for Chile (but no evidence of wage polarization),7 but no 

evidence for Mexico. Probably, the slow pace of technology 

adoption in the region has played a role in slowing the process.

Disruptive technologies that make up the Fourth 

Industrial Revolution imply an increase in the demand for 

the so-called twenty-first century skills, regardless of the 

pace of technology adoption. Cognitive abilities such as 

creativity, abstraction, and complex problem solving, as 

well as soft skills associated with emotional intelligence, 

proactive learning, and communication, will be extremely 

relevant in a world where technology will take care of the 

routine aspects of jobs. On the other hand, skills that are 

associated with technological development, such as the 

use of new technologies, programming, information design, 

and data base management, as well as information systems 

skills like monitoring and evaluation, will be essential as 

these technologies start to be incorporated into productive 

processes.

There is growing evidence that, around the world, digital 

technologies are shifting labor markets toward more flexible 

and mobile working arrangements, with employment 

rising in those categories grouped under “alternative 

work arrangements.” Freelancing, self-employment, 

and temporary work, among other nonstandard work 

relations, thrive under the structure provided by service 

apps in smartphones and other digital platforms (Calero, 

forthcoming). Currently, 4 percent of the workforce in the 

United States and Europe uses digital platforms to generate 

their income (Calero, forthcoming). The aggregate relevance 

of this working agreements for employment is expected to 

increase accordingly. For the United States alone, between 

30 percent and 40 percent of the total labor force may be 

freelancers (Salazar-Xirinachs 2017). Changing jobs more 

frequently is another growing trend. According to the U.S. 

Bureau of Labor Statistics (2015), the average baby boomer 

6.  Economists refer to the polarization of the labor force when middle-class jobs (requiring a moderate level of skills) seem to disappear relative to those 

at the bottom (requiring fewer skills) and relative to those at the top (requiring greater skill levels) (Stiglitz, 2012).

7.   Wage polarization refers to an increase in wages at the base and at the top of the wage distribution, to the detriment of the middle sector.



94 | Chapter 5

(born between 1957 and 1964) held 11.7 jobs in a 30-year 

period in the United States, while millennials (people born 

after 1980) will change jobs every two years or less. 

Fortunately, most twenty-first century skills are highly 

transferable. Thus, workers should be better prepared for 

transitions across jobs and occupations, which will be the 

norm in a more flexible labor market. The most successful 

individuals will be those capable of acquiring a combination 

of soft, cognitive, and technological skills that allows them 

to transition a more dynamic professional environment.

While there is no conclusive evidence regarding the 

relevance of the “gig” economy or other alternative work 

arrangements in Latin America and the Caribbean, the 

increasing pace of ICT penetration combined with the 

proliferation of digital platforms based on these types 

of arrangements may favor the rise of the “on demand” 

economy. For instance, Uber’s second largest market is 

Brazil (Hook and Schipani, 2017), and there were nearly 

50,000 registered drivers and 2 million active users in Chile 

by 2017 (Hidalgo and Morales, 2017). Informal employment 

rose in Latin America and the Caribbean between 1992 and 

2014, particularly for the less educated segments of the 

labor market (Calero, forthcoming). Among highly educated 

workers, formal working arrangements prevail. Although 

“alternative working arrangements” provide innovative 

ways of promoting labor market participation, specifically 

for sectors traditionally excluded from job opportunities 

(Pagés and Ripani, 2017), their growing attractiveness 

could imply that an increasing number of highly educated 

professionals decide to work as freelancers, which could 

shift the nature of informality in Latin America and the 

Caribbean. 

How will these broad trends interact with the challenges 

that Latin America and the Caribbean faces in relation 

to informality? Although informal employment has been 

traditionally identified as a long-lasting challenge for the 

region, digital technologies combined with other trends 

in labor markets may change its nature and will probably 

add an additional layer of complexity to this issue. The 

increasing incentives created by the new technologies 

for less educated and highly educated segments of the 

population alike to be part of the gig economy could lead to 

a new wave of discussion and analysis of what informality in 

Latin America and the Caribbean is and how it is composed. 

The discussion will likely include the need to rethink labor 

market regulation, understand the challenges that workers 

face, and consider protections of workers’ rights and access 

to social benefits and pensions. These changes also imply 

challenges for financing work-related training and education 

given that resources have traditionally been collected 

through payroll taxes.

Latin America and the Caribbean has been characterized 

by moderate economic growth and stagnant productivity. 

From 2000 to 2017, countries in the region grew on average 

2.7 percent per year. Although better than the developed 

world (with 2 percent for the OECD and 1.6 percent for the 

EU-28), the region lags the other developing regions (5.4 

percent) (The Conference Board, 2017). Further, increasing 

productivity remains problematic for the region. The 

productivity gap between Latin American countries and the 

United States has widened and there are no signs of catching 

up. Figure 5.2 shows that real output per hour worked was 

2.5 times higher in the United States than in Chile, the 

country in the region with the highest productivity in 2016.



The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 95 

Worryingly, the average growth rate of labor 

productivity in the region has been declining in recent 

years. From an average growth rate of 1.1 percent from 

2007 to 2014, this rate dropped to -1.5 percent and -1.6 

percent in 2015 and 2016. In 2016, output per worker 

was merely 29 percent of the equivalent for workers in 

the United States (The Conference Board, 2017). There is 

evidence that skills mismatch can help explain a nontrivial 

Figure 5.2 Real Output per Hour, Selected Latin American 
Countries versus the United States, 1950-2017 
Real output per hour remains disturbingly low in the region compared to the United States.

Source: The Conference Board (2017).

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

19
50

19
52

19
54

19
56

19
58

19
60

19
62

19
64

19
66

19
68

19
70

19
72

19
74

19
76

19
78

19
80

19
82

19
84

19
86

19
88

19
90

19
92

19
94

19
96

19
98

20
00

20
02

20
04

20
06

20
08

20
10

20
12

20
14

20
16

Argentina

Brazil

Chile

Colombia

Mexico

Peru

United States

Re
al

 o
ut

pu
t p

er
 h

ou
r, 

20
16

 U
S$

share of the productivity gap across countries (McGowan 

and Andrews, 2015). In line with the previous result, 

McGowan and Andrews (2017) find that the skills mismatch 

in Chile is twice as high as in the United States.8 While more 

evidence is needed for Latin America and the Caribbean, it 

is fair to say that to reduce the productivity gap, significant 

investments in skills development are needed and the skills 

gap needs to be closed.

8.   The difference is 40 percent in Chile versus 20 percent in the United States, using the second round of OECD’s PIAAC (Programme for the International 

Assessment of Adult Competencies) surveys collected between 2014 and 2015.



96 | Chapter 5

In addition to reduced productivity growth, reversing 

demographic trends also thwart economic growth. Economic 

growth in the region has been driven mainly by increasing 

labor inputs, reflecting growing populations and the 

expansion of labor markets. While productivity gains explain 

40 percent of economic growth, increasing labor inputs 

account for the missing 60 percent, for the period 1993–

2013, Alaimo et al. (2015) find. The demographic trends that 

have fueled the region’s economic growth are starting to 

reverse. Decreased population growth caused by declining 

fertility rates, combined with longer life expectancies, are 

shifting the region’s demographic structure away from its 

pyramidal shape. By 2030, the rate of employment growth 

is expected to fall to 1.1 percent per year. Population growth 

rates are expected to fall from 1.1 percent to 0.65 percent by 

2030, but with considerable heterogeneity across regions. 

Growth rates are highest (and will continue to be highest) in 

Central America (1.3 percent currently; 0.9 percent in 2030), 

followed by South America (0.95 percent; 0.57 percent), and 

with the Caribbean far behind (0.66 percent; 0.38 percent) 

(UN, 2017). Elderly individuals have increased from 3 percent 

of the population in 1950 to 6 percent in the 2000 and are 

expected to become 20 percent of the population by 2030 

and 30 percent by 2100 (Salazar-Xirinachs, 2017).

An increasingly older population poses challenges to 

social security systems. Accordingly, the region’s old-age 

dependency ratio9 will more than double, from 15.4 to 37.7 by 

2050 (UN, 2017). Moreover, the picture for pension savings 

in Latin America and the Caribbean is grim: less than half 

of the region’s population saves for retirement through a 

contributory pension system. Households do not compensate 

through non-pension saving instruments, either (Cavallo and 

Serebrisky, 2016). For many countries, which also have high 

rates of informal employment, ensuring provision of social 

security and pensions is an urgent and complex issue.

Latin America and the Caribbean still faces challenges 

regarding female labor force participation (LFP). The 

region’s female LFP was 54 percent in 2014, and the gap 

is wider than in Emerging and Developing Asia, and in 

advanced economies as a whole (Novta and Wong, 2017). 

Although female LFP is surprisingly high in the Caribbean, 

Central America presents the greatest challenges. The 

potential gains of increased female LFP are remarkable: the 

region could create $1.1 trillion more in GDP in a best-in-

region scenario by 2025, 14 percent higher than what could 

be created at current conditions of improvement (McKinsey 

Global Institute, 2015). In turn, by achieving gender parity (in 

terms of LFP), Latin America and the Caribbean countries 

would on average increase their GDPs by 14 percent, Novta 

and Wong (2017) estimate. Thus, improving female LFP 

could offset the impact of reduced labor force expansion in 

GDP growth. At the same time, individuals aged 15–29 years 

constitute around 25 percent of the region’s population 

and will reach their proportionate peak by 2020. This could 

imply promising growth opportunities if their labor market 

potential is fully achieved. 

9.   The old-age dependency ratio is defined as the number of people aged 65+ per 100 individuals aged 25–64.



The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 97 



98 | Chapter 5

Investing in skills appears to 
be the best buffer for workers 
and jobseekers, given the high 
degree of uncertainty induced 
by technological change and 
automation.



The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 99 

Ideas to Maximize the Benefits and 
Minimize the Risks of the Fourth Industrial 
Revolution in Latin America and the 
Caribbean 
The main policy message is that we should invest more 

in the people of Latin America and the Caribbean. A 

more educated workforce not only improves the pace of 

technology adoption but also diminishes the probability of 

being negatively influenced by it. Investing in skills appears 

to be the best buffer for workers and jobseekers, given the 

high degree of uncertainty induced by technological change 

and automation. Developing these skills is a challenge 

because many of the new required skills, such as creativity 

or social adaptability, are difficult to teach. Moreover, the 

systems to handle this transition are poorly developed 

(particularly in Latin America and the Caribbean). However, 

just as technology will provide new opportunities to improve 

production processes, it will provide new opportunities to 

train the workforce: for example, by facilitating autonomous 

and continuous learning, empowering learners, and changing 

the roles of teachers and instructors from providers of 

knowledge to mentors, guides, and coaches.

It is imperative to train workers with the best 

combination of soft, cognitive, and digital skills that will 

both take advantage of technology and be resilient to its 

adverse effects. However, knowledge is incremental in the 

sense that it builds upon previous investments (Cunha 

et al., 2006; Cunha, Heckman, and Schennach, 2010). As 

the 2017 IDB’s Development in the Americas on skills 

development shows, the region has a low skill base (IDB, 

2017). Therefore, there is a need to innovate both in the 

Latin American and Caribbean region and outside of it. In 

a parallel fashion, the progressively fluctuating dynamics 

of the labor market imply that workers will increasingly 

need to deal with transitions throughout their productive 

lives. Successful trajectories will require support. Thus, 

harnessing the potential of new technologies to develop 

tools to facilitate favorable transitions presents an 

opportunity for achieving this goal. 

Perhaps the best example of learning for the world of 

work is technical and vocational education and training 

(TVET). Technological change will speed up the pace at 

which skills become obsolete. As more tasks become 

susceptible to automation, people may need to learn faster. 

As such, the traditional model where people go to school 

full time and then enter the labor market until they retire 

is no longer appropriate. The division between learning 

and earning is already fuzzy and appears to be giving way 

to a model of lifelong learning. Technology provides the 

flexibility to learn anywhere and anytime. It makes learning 

a more tailored, personal experience in terms of content, 

paths, and evaluations. Examples include the use of virtual 

reality in practical learning and competence evaluations, as 

well as blended learning programs that include both virtual 

and physical learning spaces.

The other great challenge is for education systems to 

respond to the requirements of the new labor market. To 

keep up with the challenge, lifelong learning must be flexible 

and emphasize practical knowledge based on hands-on 

experience. Teaching methods must be tailored for adults 

who need to learn to let go of old concepts and learn new 

ones. On-demand, shorter courses that allow people to 

perform new tasks in their current occupations or upskill/

reskill for new occupations are needed.



100 | Chapter 5



The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 101 

The right institutional arrangements must also be in 

place to ease the transitions between learning and earning. 

Having instruments to order the supply of courses, such as 

qualifications frameworks, can provide a clear picture of the 

different paths available to learners. These instruments must 

make sure that transitions between different learning paths 

are possible and flexible. They must also support transitions 

by identifying baseline knowledge required, have the means 

to recognized previous knowledge regardless of how it was 

acquired, and provide guidance so that people can make 

informed decisions to navigate the skills development system.

To make learning relevant for labor markets, it is essential 

to identify the skills that firms require and ensure that 

workers have ways of acquiring them. This requires firms 

to shift the focus of their hiring processes from demanding 

titles, occupations, and tasks to demanding skills. Having 

workers with the right skills, rather than having workers who 

can perform specific tasks, will make firms more flexible 

and responsive to the changing economic environment. To 

make sure workers have the right skills, for example, the 

government of Singapore has launched a program called 

Skillsfuture, whereby every citizen has access to a credit 

fund to learn and stay current in the job market. This fund 

has been available since January 2016 to every Singaporean 

once they turn 25 years of age, with the aims of helping 

people take ownership of their lifelong learning process. 

Effective public-private collaboration strategies for 

training people are also needed. How will the private sector 

face the skills gap? The answer would ideally include a 

combination of pooling public, private, and individual 

resources and each actor’s comparative advantage so 

that the allocation of resources is socially optimal. More 

than resources, this approach requires the private sector 

to lead the process of identifying and ensuring that the 

skills identified are the ones they require. Once these 

skills have been identified, it is essential to work alongside 

governments to implement initiatives that close the skill 

gaps, such as apprenticeship programs or training subsidies. 

Apprenticeships have been shown to help students not only 

get better, stable jobs, but to increase both occupation-

specific skills and socioemotional skills.

Technology is disruptive, but it also offers creative 

solutions to help workers transition between jobs. A 

technology that is helpful in this respect is semantic web 

matching algorithms. They facilitate job search and matching 

using online data from job portals where both firms and 

jobseekers provide information from CVs and vacancies. An 

operational example of these platforms from governments 

around the world is My Next Move, which provides information 

for career guidance (occupational descriptions, knowledge 

and skill requirements, and institutions where training can 

be obtained) for job seekers and connects them to online 

job aggregators like Careerbuilder and Indeed. Using another 

technology, EURES provides information for both jobseekers 

and employers supporting job search and matching in the 

European Union. This platform connects jobseekers to 

vacancies listed in Public Employment Services of various 

European countries. Another interesting example is the 

Occupation Outlook app developed by the New Zealand 

government, which puts information for jobseekers and 

people looking for careers at their fingertips.

While private initiatives to help workers and firms find 

one another have existed for some time, the availability of 

online data has incentivized tech companies like LinkedIn, 

http://www.skillsfuture.sg/
https://www.mynextmove.org/
https://www.careerbuilder.com/
https://www.indeed.com/
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.fronde.occupationaloutlook&hl=en


102 | Chapter 5

Facebook, and Google to step into the search and matching 

field. Open data made available by public agencies have 

helped private firms come up with innovative solutions for 

workers and firms. Google recently launched its new job 

search tool, Google Careers, and has already expanded 

its operations to four countries in Latin America: Chile, 

Colombia, Mexico, and Peru.

The private sector has been quick to expand 

international occupations and skill classification systems 

to its needs, creating new proprietary definitions that go far 

beyond these standard classifications. The main limitation 

of international classifications is that they were originally 

conceived to generate comparable statistical information 

across countries and over time, not to reduce information 

asymmetries in the labor market. With a growing trend in 

online job search, technologies that can read and interpret 

text from CVs and vacancy postings will be more important. 

These have come a long way from word search to semantic 

searches that contextualize the search and can provide 

better matches using machine learning and artificial 

intelligence in a timely and relevant manner.

Social security systems need to adapt to the new 

digital reality and future changes in demographics and the 

labor market. In the next three decades, Latin America and 

the Caribbean will transit from being one of the youngest 

regions to one of the oldest. In 2050, one out of five people 

in the region will be over 65 years old. Such an impressive 

demographic change will undoubtedly have enormous 

implications regarding pensions, health, and care for the 

elderly. In addition, new labor relations and high informality 

pose challenges to social security. The disintegration of 

the traditional salaried relationship, the foundation of most 

social security systems, poses new threats to the financing of 

health and pension arrangements, as well as increasing the 

ever-growing inequality between those workers protected 

by relatively generous pensions benefits and those who 

have none or rely on noncontributory pensions. 

Conversely, technological changes bring enormous 

opportunities to transit from a social security system 

anchored in the nineteenth century to new models adapted 

to the realities of the twenty-first century. Digital tools can 

allow social security systems to cover people regardless 

of their working status (freelancer, salaried, independent), 

due to digitalization of income and transactions. Traditional 

informal workers detached from formal social security 

systems could now be connected. For instance, it could 

be easier to identify and tax the self-employed (formal or 

informal) working on a platform than those who do not 

work on a platform. Also, new ways of generating income 

can increase tax revenue that can help make pensions more 

sustainable. Furthermore, technologies such as blockchain 

bring the promise of enhanced efficiency, security, and 

trust, potentially enabling cooperation among institutions 

that traditionally lacked incentives to share data and 

methodologies. 

New technologies should also facilitate a process of 

social innovation regarding savings, social insurance, and 

risk-sharing arrangements, as well as different ways of 

packaging retirement solutions. Digital platforms could 

bring together workers of any category to insure themselves 

against risks that are either expensive or cannot be diversified 

in financial markets. Policymakers can facilitate the creation 

of such solutions by enacting a regulatory framework to 

ensure transparency and good governance. There are already 



The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 103 

products available in the market with such characteristics. 

Consider the case of tontines, a retirement solution that 

enables intragenerational risk sharing among participants. 

Three centuries ago tontines were a popular pension 

solution, but were rapidly discredited because of operational 

problems—as well as a perverse incentive for participants 

to assassinate one another, given that the last person in the 

savings pool got the largest share. Today, three technological 

developments make it possible to run a tontine scheme in 

a safe (anonymous), transparent, and low-cost manner: a 

digital platform, blockchain, and automated investments. 

Although technologies offer the promise of easing 

the endemic spread of informality and tax evasion in the 

region, bold public policies should also be put in place. First, 

regulation and legal definitions should be adapted to cover 

the new labor market reality of workers immersed in the gig 

economy. For example, the mandate for the self-employed 

and other collectives working through platforms to 

contribute to social security regimes should top the reform 

agenda. Second, tax and social security authorities should 

transit to the digital age by upgrading both their hardware 

and personnel to be able to make use of big data. Big data 

allow authorities to better fulfill their mandate, communicate 

better with citizens who will demand more information, and 

encourage citizens to plan for the future. Third, policymakers 

can facilitate the creation of innovative solutions by enacting 

a regulatory framework to ensure transparency and good 

governance. And last but not least, societies must prepare 

for an aging world. An aging demographic imposes painful 

solutions on pensions systems. They will have to adapt to 

lower fertility and longer life expectancies. Policies must 

ensure that this cost is shared across several generations.



104 | Chapter 5

References

Aboal, D., and G. Zunino. 2017. Innovation and Skills in Latin America. 

Integration and Trade Journal 21 (42, August): Robot-lution: The 

Future of Work in Latin American Integration 4.0: 42–57.

Acemoglu, D., and P. Restrepo. 2017. Robots and Jobs: Evidence from 

US Labor Markets. NBER Working Paper 23285, National Bureau of 

Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Aggarwal N., J. Bezerra, R. Borno, J. Chen, D. Kennedy, D. Michael, M. 

Rübmann, and J. Wenstrup. 2013. Ahead of the Curve: Lessons on 

Technology and Growth from Small-Business Leaders. The Boston 

Consulting Group.

Alaimo V., M. Bosch, D. Kaplan, C. Pagés, and L. Ripani. 2015. Jobs for 

Growth. Washington, DC: Inter-American Development Bank.

Baller S., S. Dutta, and B. Lanvin. 2016. The Global Information 

Technology Report 2016: Innovating in the Digital Economy. 

Geneva: World Economic Forum.

Bughin J., M. Chui, M. Dewhurst, K. George, J. Manyika, M. Miremadi, 

and P. Willmott. 2017. A Future that Works: Automation, 

Employment and Productivity. McKinsey & Company.

Calero, C. Forthcoming. Future of Work: Alternative Work 

Arrangements. IDB Discussion Paper, Inter-American Development 

Bank. 

Cavallo, E., and T. Serebrisky, eds. 2016. Saving for Development: 

How Latin America and the Caribbean Can Save More and Better. 

Development in the Americas 2016. Washington, DC: Inter-

American Development Bank.

Conference Board, The. 2017. The Conference Board Total Economy 

DatabaseTM (Adjusted Version), November 2017.

Cunha, F., J. J. Heckman, L. Lochner, and D. V. Masterov. 2006. 

Interpreting the Evidence on Life Cycle Skill Formation. Chapter 

12 in The Handbook of the Economics of Education 1, 697–812. 

Elsevier B. V.

Cunha, F. , J. J. Heckman, and S. M. Schennach. 2010. Estimating 

the Technology of Cognitive and Noncognitive Skill Formation. 

Econometrica 78 (3): 883–931.

Frey C. B., and M. Osborne, 2017. The Future of Employment: How 

Susceptible Are Jobs to Computerization?, Technological 

Forecasting and Social Change 114: 254–80.

García, A., and E. Iglesias. 2017. Informe Anual del Índice de 

Desarrollo de la Banda Ancha en América Latina y el Caribe. 

Washington, DC: Inter-American Development Bank.

GSMA (Global System for Mobile Communications Association). 

2017. The Mobile Economy: Latin America and the Caribbean 2017. 

London: GSMA.

Hidalgo, F., and D. Morales. 2017. Choferes Uber crecen 84% en 

10 meses y usuarios suman 1,8 millones en Chile. La Tercera 

February 1. http://www2.latercera.com/noticia/choferes-uber-

crecen-84-10-meses-usuarios-suman-18-millones-chile/.

Hook, L., and A. Schipani. 2017. Battle over Uber and Ride-Hailing 

Heats Up in Brazil. Financial Times, November 4. https://www.

ft.com/content/4e31dbb0-c00e-11e7-b8a3-38a6e068f464.

IDB (Inter-American Development Bank). 2017. Learning Better: Public 

Policy for Skills Development. Development in the Americas 2017. 

Washington, DC: IDB. 

http://www2.latercera.com/noticia/choferes-uber-crecen-84-10-meses-usuarios-suman-18-millones-chile/
http://www2.latercera.com/noticia/choferes-uber-crecen-84-10-meses-usuarios-suman-18-millones-chile/
https://www.ft.com/content/4e31dbb0-c00e-11e7-b8a3-38a6e068f464
https://www.ft.com/content/4e31dbb0-c00e-11e7-b8a3-38a6e068f464


The Future of Work: Regional Perspectives | 105 

Ivanschitz, R., and D. Korn. 2017. Computación en nube: la 

reconversión del espacio en red. Integration and Trade Journal 21 

(42, August): Robot-lution: The Future of Work in Latin American 

Integration 4.0: 256–65.

Khanna S., J. Manyika, G. Pinkus, S. Ramaswamy, H. Sarrazin, G. 

Sethupathy, and A. Yaffe. 2015. Digital America: A Tale of the 

Haves and the Have-Mores. McKinsey & Company.

McGowan, M. A., and D. Andrews. 2015. The Future of Productivity: 

Main Background Papers Labour Market Mismatch and Labour 

Productivity: Evidence from PIAAC Data. OECD Economics 

Department Working Paper 1209, OECD. 

---------. 2017. Skills Mismatch, Productivity and Policies. Evidence 

from the Second Wave of PIAAC. OECD Economic Department 

Working Paper 1403, OECD. 

Messina, J., A. M. Oviedo, and G. Pica. Forthcoming. Job Polarization 

in Latin America. IDB Working Paper, Inter-American Development 

Bank. 

McKinsey Global Institute. 2015. The Power of Parity: How Advancing 

Women’s Equality Can Add $12 Trillion to Global Growth. 

September. 

Micco, A., and Soler N. Forthcoming. The Future of Jobs in Latin 

America and the Caribbean. IDB Technical Note, Inter-American 

Development Bank, Washington, DC. 

Novta, N., and J. Wong. 2017. Women at Work in Latin America and 

the Caribbean. IMF Working Paper 17/34, International Monetary 

Fund, Washington, DC.

Nübler, Irmgard. 2017. Transformación productiva: Oportunidades 

para países de ingresos medios. Integration and Trade Journal, 21 

(42, August): Robot-lution: The Future of Work in Latin American 

Integration 4.0: 308–23.

Pagés C., and L. Ripani. 2017. Employment in the Fourth Industrial 

Revolution. Integration and Trade Journal 21 (42, August): Robot-

lution: The Future of Work in Latin American Integration 4.0: 

262–73.

Salazar-Xirinachs, J. M. 2017. La metamorfosis del trabajo. 

Integration and Trade Journal, 21 (42, August): Robot-lution: The 

Future of Work in Latin American Integration 4.0: 70–83.

Stiglitz, J. E. 2012. The Price of Inequality: How Today’s Divided 

Society Endangers Our Future. Norton. 

Sundararajan, A. 2017. Capitalismo Colaborativo. Integration and 

Trade Journal 21 (42, August): Robot-lution: The Future of Work in 

Latin American Integration 4.0: 58–69.

Surfing Tsunamis and Nxtp.Labs. 2017. Tecnolatinas: Latin America 

Riding the Technology Tsunami. Washington, DC: Inter-American 

Development Bank.

UN (United Nations), Department of Economic and Social Affairs, 

Population Division. 2017. World Population Prospects: The 2017 

Revision, DVD edition.

United States, Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2015. Number of Jobs Held, 

Labor Market Activity, and Earnings Growth Among the Youngest 

Baby Boomers: Results from a Longitudinal Survey. News Release. 








	0. Cover 1
	1. INTRO -2018ABR17
	2. AFDB 4 -2018ABR17
	3. ASDB 4 -2018ABR17
	4. EBRD 5 -2018ABR17
	5. IDB 5 -2018ABR17
	6. Cover 2



