In the past, the emergence of new network infrastructures (canals, railroads, electricity, telecommunications, the Internet, etc.) has had a profound effect on the world economy.1 New ways of moving people and goods, energy, and information often led to waves of innovation, and over the centuries these innovations have transformed markets as existing firms restructure and new firms emerge to capture new opportunities. Mobile money, while often described as a money-transfer product, is in fact a network infrastructure for storing and moving money that facilitates the exchange of cash and electronic value between various actors, including clients, businesses, the government, and financial service providers.
Bill Maurer is Professor of Anthropology and Law at the University of California, Irvine, and Director of the Institute for Money Technology and Financial Inclusion.
Mobile operators in Kenya have launched mobile money services similar to Safaricom's M-PESA during the past two years, including Yu (YuCash), Orange (Orange Money), and Zain (Zap). However, M-PESA remains the most widely used mobile money service and is the focus of our study.
Mobile money appears to have the potential to solve many of these issues. By giving banks and other financial service providers a cheap way to outsource cash handling and deposit and withdrawal transactions, mobile money can enable providers to serve clients at a lower cost per transaction and with a reduced investment in physical infrastructure. Moreover, by unbundling and outsourcing transaction handling, banks may be able to get more value out of their existing branches and branch staff. They can refocus them on more value-adding and complex tasks, such as wealth and risk management advisory services and cross-selling products. Mobile money also helps clients by giving them a dense network of transaction outlets where they work and live, reducing the cost to clients of accessing financial services. Once clients are in the financial system and able to transact at low cost with banks and other financial service providers, the platform enables the provider to offer a new set of services and delivery models that were not previously possible or profitable.
In Kenya, Safaricom's M-PESA has managed to overcome the "last mile" problem the difficulty of delivering a service over the very last leg of its journey to a remote client by creating a network that connects over 70 percent of Kenyan households to the financial system (13.3 million people, approximately 60 percent of all adults in Kenya).3 The M-PESA network handles more transactions in a year than Western Union does globally, and the value of transactions represents more than 15 percent of Kenya's GDP.
In this paper, we present the results of some initial probes into understanding how market players are harnessing M-PESA as a platform for new services, and to gauge the emerging ecosystem of these services enabled by M-PESA.
We also incorporate results from a recent study conducted by Microsave for the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, which assesses new mobile money-enabled products and services using information available from desk research, interviews with the implementers and users, secret shoppers, and focus groups.
Application Programming Interfaces (APIs) are sets of instructions that allow different software applications to interface with one another. Well-designed APIs are powerful because they allow the development of new applications that seamlessly incorporate the functionality of the original system into their workings. APIs are a recent innovation: their origin is in TCP/IP network architecture, but their use for user-oriented application development dates to the mid-1990s. The invention of M-PESA corresponds in time to the explosion of interest in APIs for third-party application development, itself propelled by the mobile revolution, so it can hardly be blamed for having a poor API (PayPal, for example, launched APIs in 2010).
Many of these integration efforts and products are still in an early stage, and some of the new products have few active customers. More detail on the market activity we found follows.
Most financial service providers in Kenya are joining mobile money platforms as a channel through which their clients can make deposits and withdrawals from bank accounts and other financial products. Financial service providers integrate with mobile money platforms using a variety of mechanisms that vary according to the institution. These linkages are often difficult and expensive to create, and many providers we spoke to are wrestling with the process. In our analysis below we focus on M-PESA, since it is by far the dominant platform, although other mobile money providers exist.
Most providers offer clients two separate interfaces for making deposits and withdrawals. Deposits are done through the normal Bill Pay option in the M-PESA menu on their phone. Clients must then use a USSD-based interface (described below) that allows them to trigger withdrawals to their M-PESA account. Here we describe how some of the integrations work.
Bank and M-PESA and can be opened directly at an M-PESA agent. The two main elements that differentiate the M-KESHO product from others is that both deposits and withdrawals can be initiated through the SIM-based menu, as opposed to relying on the less user-friendly USSD menu. Figure 1 shows the mechanics of M-KESHO's interface with M-PESA. Additionally, and perhaps more importantly, the product was marketed and branded as a joint effort, which probably boosted initial uptake substantially.5 In November 2010, Equity partnered with the mobile operator Orange and launched its own mobile money product to try to increase competition with M-PESA. Along with the cash merchant network Orange plans to develop, Equity will establish its own cash merchants, thereby further increasing customers' access to financial services through mobile money.
account, although they are not able to withdraw funds. The customer experience is similar to paying a bill: she selects Pay Bill, enters the short code for the recipient, which M-PESA calls a "business number," as well as her own account number, as she would, for example, with an account number at the power company. This directs a transfer to be made from her electronic "wallet" to the bank's biller account. Most banks allow deposits through the Pay Bill channel, even if they have not yet managed to facilitate withdrawals through M-PESA.
Withdrawals using bulk pay and USSD. A subset of financial institutions enables customer transactions through M-PESA in the other direction (i.e., withdrawals) using a bank-run USSD menu. Institutions pursuing this approach include Barclays Bank of Kenya, Kenya Commercial Bank, Co-operative Bank, NIC Bank, Family Bank, K-rep Bank, Kenya Post Office Savings Bank, and Faulu Kenya. In order to process a withdrawal, customers have to link to their bank's m-bank-ing platform by dialing a USSD code (for example, *498# for Kenya Post Office Savings Bank). Funds are then transferred from the bank account to Safaricom and into the customer's M-PESA wallet. Once the funds are deposited into the wallet, the customer receives a message that funds are available.
Neither the Pay Bill deposits nor the bulk payment withdrawals need to be real time because the bank does not have to credit the client account immediately. Instead, providers typically send the bulk pay transactions in a batch on a set frequency; however, most do this every few minutes.
Mwalimu SACCO integrated its products with the M-PESA platform through Spotcash, a service that allows members of SACCOs and microfinance institutions to withdraw and deposit their money from and to their savings account, respectively, through SMS, USSD, IVR (interactive voice response), or WAP (wireless application protocol)6. Once the withdrawal request has been received, the money is transferred to the member's M-PESA account. The cost is Ksh 10 per transaction (US$0.12), not including SACCO fees or Safaricom withdrawal fees. Another example is Celullant, which has developed integration solutions for many banks, including a platform for the World Council of Credit Unions, that will enable SACCO to connect with M-PESA.
Innovators are new entrepreneurial ventures or products with a purely mobile money-based business model for financial services.7 They fall into two categories: existing providers developing new types of products that only operate through the mobile money channel, and new entrepreneurial ventures launched around mobile money-based products. In both cases, the new products facilitate transactions through the mobile phone and mobile money agents, rather than through legacy channels like retail bank outlets or sending money by check or money order. Savings and insurance seem to be particularly popular financial products in this space, probably as a result of the need for frequent small-value transactions that would be expensive to facilitate through normal retail channels both for clients who would have to travel further and for institutions that would have to maintain a retail channel.
 Zimele asset management offers a new pension scheme in which clients can remit a deposit of as little as Ksh 250 (US$3.13) on a regular basis via the Pay Bill feature and earn interest at a rate of 8.5 percent quarterly. Zimele started this in late 2008 and claims it is getting a good response from depositors who want to avoid traveling to the head office to pay installments.
 Changamka Microhealth, Ltd., offers a medical savings plan for out-patient and maternity health care for expectant mothers. Customers use M-PESA's Pay Bill function to save small contributions to a smart card, where the money is locked in for use when one falls ill or needs maternity care. In selected clinics, customers can pay for medical services at a discounted rate using the smart card.
Contributions to the smart card can also be made via M-PESA from family members, friends, and other community members.
 M-PESA has also enabled the launch of entirely new service providers, including a virtual microfinance institution named Musoni. Musoni only offers credit services, although they hope to provide deposit services in the future, and all operations are cash free, with disbursements and repayments done through M-PESA's Pay Bill feature. In addition, Musoni has developed a server that creates reports based on data provided by Safaricom and facilitates lending operations. Musoni customers are not charged for repaying through M-PESA or for the loan disbursement through M-PESA. The customer is only responsible for paying the cash-out fee from their M-PESA wallet.
As financial service providers and other businesses struggle to integrate with M-PESA, a mini-industry of software developers and integrators has started to specialize in M-PESA platform integration. A number have also built and begun marketing their own middleware applications, which usually specialize in facilitating certain types of integrations. These bridge-builders fall into two broad categories: those that are strengthening M-PESA's connections with financial institutions for the delivery of financial products, and those that are strengthening M-PESA's ability to interoperate with other mobile and online payment systems. The lack of functional M-PESA API is hindering bridge-building, but several companies have nonetheless devised tools for new financial functions and online payments.
Connectors with other mobile and online payments. Other technology companies are strengthening mobile money's ability to interoperate with online payment systems. Webtribe's Jambopay, Symbiotics' Moca, Intrepid Data System's iPay, and Pespal are a few examples of payment services that allow buyers to pay for goods and services over the Internet using their phones.
From the client perspective, integrating with mobile money increases the density of access points and the reach of access points in new areas, transforming the geographical distribution of delivery channels. Many financial service providers cite the lower cost in time and money for clients who want to make payments and deposits or receive insurance payments, withdrawals, or loan disbursements. Smaller institutions in particular lack widespread distribution networks (some have only a single branch) and thus can benefit from plugging into an ubiquitous, low-cost retail delivery channel. Some institutions also report that the existing ATM network is not well situated for the poor. For example, Nayndarua Teachers SACCO notes that ATMs are clustered around wealthier and urban areas far away from their low-income and rural clientele.
From the supplier perspective, there are a number of benefits afforded by the reduced need to deal with cash. Several providers suggest that keeping money in electronic form with clear records of every transaction is valuable in reducing the risk of theft and misappropriation by employees. Providers are also able to save on cash-handling and collection costs. By removing the need to keep retail locations and field agents stocked with cash, many costs and risks are removed for both savings and lending operations. For example, with its purely mobile-based business model, Musoni hopes to maintain very low-cost operations. This not only reduces costs for the provider, it can also enable previously unprofitable small-value transactionsalthough M-PESA's transaction fees are still too high to generate this benefit in significant amounts.
Airtel Mobile money currently relaunching the ZAP product, Safaricom may eventually face some pressure to reduce prices on transfers.
While M-PESA's API was considered the worst, other mobile money APIs in Kenya are not much better. Yu-cash is lauded as having the best API, although its extremely limited agent footprint and client base make it of little use to banks seeking to reach the mass market.
facilitates new ways to communicate with customers via text and voice messages. Some providers are already experimenting in this area.
We also uncovered a number of new entrepreneurial ventures that exist solely on the mobile money platform, although none of these startups had yet generated a significant volume of business. While the level of transactions going to and from the financial system through these newly enabled mobile money channels is still relatively low, according to anecdotal evidence, and it does not yet seem likely that large numbers of new poor clients are being reached because of mobile money, these are nonetheless the early days, and the level of activity is already striking.
1. Historians of technology have long noted the economic and social changes wrought by new infrastructure, such as electrical power and rail. See Thomas P. Hughes, Networks of Power: Electrification in Western Society, 1880-1930, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1992. For a cautionary tale, see Wolfgang Schivelbusch, The Railway Journey: The Industrialization and Perception of Time and Space, Berkeley: University of California Press, 1987.
5. It's not clear whether this interest will be sustained, however, as the rate of uptake slowed significantly after the product launch. There were approximately 600,000 accounts opened in the few months after launch in May 2010, but the rate of activations dropped dramatically in the fall of 2010. The high price of deposits and withdrawals and difficulties in the relationship between Equity and Safaricom have contributed to the stagnant growth of the product.
7. Most of the innovators link to M-PESA using one or more of the integration options outlined in the Integrators section.
9. We feel there are two main features of a "good" API: predictability of API management from the provider and ease of use, which may or may not be related to degree of openness or adherence to industry standards; a user-friendly API might still be a walled garden or adhere to its own set of standards, for example. It is hard to program when the system might change without warning and when the system is not designed to be open to third-party programmers. Safaricom has no formal API management process, and when changes are made to the interface, financial institutions are left scrambling to fix them, regularly leaving their systems down for up to days at a time.
10. See Tavneet Suri and Billy Jack, "Mobile Money: The Economics of M-PESA" [NBER Working Paper No. 16721], 2011.