The Better Than Cash Alliance (BTCA) is an alliance of governments and private sector and development organizations committed to replacing the use of cash payments with electronic payments, where appropriate, and to promoting a 'cash-lite' economy.
BTCA's Development Results Focused Research Programme (DRFRP) accelerates the generation and dissemination of knowledge and tools for stakeholders transitioning part of their payments from cash to electronic. The DRFRP has three components: 1) Readiness diagnostics, which compile existing data on the volumes, values, and payment means for each kind of payment made by governments, the private sector, and development community partners, and assess the country's readiness to replace cash payments with electronic payments; 2) Case studies of ongoing shifts; and 3) Toolkits to provide practical steps for BTCA stakeholders to plan, measure, and implement shifts.
 All calculations are converted to US dollars using an exchange rate of COP 1.914.22, which corresponds to the average market rate for the last six months of 2013, published by Banco de la Republica.
Coffee is a vital product for the Colombian economy, representing 3% of exports and almost 2% of GDP. Nearly three-quarters of the country's coffee is grown by more than half a million small farmers, who each have less than five hectares of land. Coffee growers are all represented by the Federacion Nacional de Cafeteros de Colombia' (the Colombian Coffee Growers Federation, or the Federacion). The Federacion is a large membership organization, the board and governance structure of which is elected by the farmers themselves. The Federacion, through related institutions, provides services such as technical assistance to farmers; channels government subsidies to farmers; and offers a guarantee scheme by which farmers can sell their coffee to the Federacion at a set minimum price. This requires the Federacion to make payments to farmers throughout the country, especially in remote areas where there are few if any alternative buyers of coffee.
risks of transporting cash had risen dramatically, in part because of rising insecurity from an insurgency in some rural areas. In addition, the traditional banking infrastructure had been shrinking with the closure of rural branches following a local financial crisis in the late 1990s. When the Federacion began to pay farmers in checks instead of cash, farmers would often discount checks at well below face value to get cash in hand.
into the large Banco de Bogota banking group. The bank offered a personalized prepaid card with both a magstripe and a chip. This card was designed to operate only on a closed-loop basis at ATMs or at the special point-of-sale (POS) devices deployed by the bank at coffee purchase points and rural merchants. Based on the previous ID that coffee growers had, and taking into account the new chip incorporated, it was called the Cedula Cafetera Inteligente (or the Coffee Smart ID Card, referred to hereafter as the Cedula). Farmers would be paid for their coffee, as well as for government benefits, using the card. And they could then either withdraw the balance in cash and/or use the card for purchases at participating merchants.
Six years into the program, the results are revealing and important for efforts to shift from cash and check to electronic payments.
Second, the card was used in unexpected ways: Most of the receipts were tied to the disbursement of various government subsidy schemes, rather than Federacion coffee purchases. The cards and a supplementary database of farmers and their farms allowed the disbursement of subsidies to be better targeted, increasing efficiency, transparency, speed, and security  made more important during a period when the coffee crop was hit by weather and price shocks.
This case study focuses on the Federacion and the Colombian government as the payer. The coffee growers themselves were intended to be payers under the project but supply- and demand-side factors prevented this. Businesses  small-scale farmers  are the payees.
Coffee growers are represented and supported by the Federacion,7 founded in 1927 and now one of the largest rural NGOs in the world. The Federacion, through a range of institutions,8 provides many services to farmers such as technical assistance; promotes the brand of Colombian coffee; has established more than 185 direct retail shops; enables loans; and distributes government subsidies.
The Federacion, through the Fondo Nacional del Cafe (FoNC),11 also provides growers with a coffee purchase guarantee. Coffee growers can sell their crops to private buyers and exporters, or, if the price on the private market is too low, they can sell to cooperatives,12 many of which act on behalf of the Federacion. The FoNC guarantees coffee growers a minimum purchase price13 for their crops, thus ensuring coffee growers a transparent market and protecting their income. The FoNC offers credit to cooperatives to make these purchases.
The Federacion faced the same challenges when it distributed government subsidies  high costs of cash transportation and operational difficulties in terms of verification.
 Coffee growers could cash out using the magnetic stripe at any Banco de Bogota ATM at no cost, at ATMs of the same bank group for a discounted fee, and at any other bank's ATM for the normal fee.
 The chip could store 17 fields' worth of information about the coffee growers, as well as the card's balance for making offline POS transactions and cashing out offline.
Usage of the Cedula cards was limited early in the project20 at least in part because many farmers did not have money on their cards. This was caused by two factors: 1) Few coffee growers sold their crops to the Federacion and asked that revenue to be deposited to the card (even as of June 2013, coffee purchases represented just 1% of the number of transactions, and 4% of the value, disbursed to the cards during the life of the project21); and 2) Many of the early subsidies distributed over the Cedula were narrowly tailored to specific farmer profiles.
As a result, as of June 2013, 64% of the transactions disbursed through the Cedula came from more than 15 subsidy programs launched in this period,23 and 34% came from credit disbursements (representing 40% and 55% by value, respectively).
The Permanence, Sustainability and Future (PSF) program was designed by the Federacion with the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development to encourage coffee growers with traditional coffee plantations of less than 5 hectares to renew their crops, substituting for new rust-resistant coffee varieties. Loans had a 7-year term with a 2-year grace period, during which interest, at subsidized rates, was paid by the Federacion.
Under the PSF more than 163,000 farmers have benefitted from credits of an average value of $2,600 per producer, allowing the renewal of 156,000 hectares of coffee plantations.
 POS devices in 891 commercial establishments, 417 of which were located in Almacenes del Cafe (input shops affiliated with the Federacion) and 474 in other commercial establishments  the first device for most of these shops.
Banco de Bogota did not advertise on behalf of the shops where the POS devices were installed; the shopkeepers said they just sat and waited for coffee growers to come, which did not happen.
To get more POS devices in the municipalities, there were some initial approaches with the acquiring networks for Visa and MasterCard (Credibanco and Redeban). But these networks saw the low usage of debit and credit cards in those municipalities, which limited the viability of POS devices. The process was stopped and the network continued to be closed-loop.
89 still had no ATM, forcing coffee growers there to withdraw at commercial establishments or "convenience stores"25 with one of the closed-loop network's POS devices (see Table 2).
relative to all Cedula withdrawals at ATMs, declined from 63% to 50%, while in terms of value it fell from 60% to 43%, suggesting that access and convenience may outweigh the importance of fees (see Figures 8 and 9).
In addition to developing the channels, the Federacion and Banco de Bogota had to get cards into the hands of the coffee growers, and get the coffee growers to start using the cards. This has turned out to be a more complex task than initially thought.
Unlike the value credited to the Cedula from coffee purchases or from monetary subsidies, the value in the virtual "pockets" had a limited validity, after which it was returned to the government if it was not claimed.
These "pockets" were used in 2010 to disburse the Competitiveness subsidy, aimed at promoting coffee plantations' renewal. Later in 2010 and 2011 the "pockets" were also used for the disbursement of a subsidy for fungicides and fertilizers called "Ola Invernal" in response to a very strong rainy season that caused many floods and, through increased humidity, raised the risk of pests, specifically the coffee rust.
However, to claim the subsidy, a personalized certification with the farmer's picture, ID number, and subsidy value, issued by the Federacion, had to be presented in addition to the Cedula. Distributing these certifications was a high burden for the Federacion.
A total of 313,000 coffee growers benefited from this program, receiving products of an average value of USD $105.
distribution was only possible with the targeting that the Cedula platform  and the SICA database allowed.
the costs of replacing the cards;32 advertising and the staff to manage the Cedula;33 as well as a minimum float commitment, of which the opportunity cost was estimated at $300,000.34 The total cost of the Cedula between 2007-2013 was $4.1 million. This means a savings of up to $15.5 million, or 79%, compared with cash, which would have been the most likely alternative payment mechanism. Check disbursement, while included in these calculations, would have been much less practical to implement.
This helped compensate for the increase in operational costs related to changes to the program, including allowing coffee growers access to bank branches to collect the PIC subsidy, which often exceeded the per-withdrawal ATM limits.
Banco de Bogota to develop a more comprehensive relationship with the coffee growers. And the bank's investment in the acquiring network for POS devices, though little-used under the closed-loop scheme, could pay dividends if those commercial establishments can be converted to agents or act as new "acquired commercial establishments" with interoperable POS devices, an essential part of the new model to be implemented in 2014.
with very small producers and low financial infrastructure; Gigante, a medium-sized municipality with small producers and some financial institutions; and Anserma, a developed municipality in the traditional coffee-growing region, with a balance of small and medium producers and a competitive financial sector.
Many of the coffee farmers had the Cedula for many years and watched the card transition from simply a voting instrument to a tool for receiving and making payments. All the coffee farmers participating in FGDs knew that they could receive subsidies and benefits from the Federacion to their Cedula, and they knew they could be paid for coffee sales via the card. Nearly every farmer interviewed had completed at least one transaction with the Cedula, and many had used it within the month before the research.
level seem to affect the facility with which respondents learn to use new technologies, such as how to operate an ATM. However, even in Anserma, in a group of medium-sized and relatively educated farmers, the majority of participants were still uncomfortable with the technology of the Cedula and with using ATMs.
Another factor in favor of checks, some participants said, is that ATMs have maximum daily withdrawal limits. So if a farmer lives far away from the nearest ATM, he has to make multiple long trips to access his money to repay debts and buy inputs, whereas high-value checks can be cashed all at once.
Some farmers also said they valued the security the Ceduia provides: unlike with cash or checks, the Ceduia does not require farmers to carry large sums of cash.
agricultural products, supermarkets, and furniture stores. However, focus group participants reported either that they did not know that one could use the card to pay in other shops, or that it did not work when they tried.
product, including the option to deposit, which would allow for more flexibility in savings, and the ability to pay for additional goods and services electronically. The demand for more options linked to this electronic payment mechanism is an encouraging sign that the Cedula project is helping to shift mentalities and behaviors toward increased use of electronic payments in Colombia. However, information campaigns will likely be needed to accompany rollouts of new services to help build capacity and awareness of these options among coffee growers, many of whom are new to electronic payments.
During 2013, the Federacion and Banco de Bogota analyzed the results of the Cedula and concluded that a closed-loop network was not sufficient to change payment habits or satisfy the coffee growers' financial needs.
a huge change that makes the business case more attractive for Banco de Bogota. The bank commits to maintain the coffee-voting platform and to continue structuring the virtual "pockets" when required (see Table 4).
 The Cedula generated significant efficiency gains for the Federacion and was instrumental in its effective disbursement of massive government subsidies.
 The use of proprietary technology had strong implications not only for usage but for the provider's ability to respond to new requirements. The chip technology was new to the market and was difficult to adapt, necessitating the use of virtual "pockets," a creative solution which reflects the need to build more flexibility into the technological requirements to providers.
 Government subsidies provided a powerful, unexpected catalyst for take-up and usage of the scheme, but usage was limited to receiving and cashing out funds.
 Coffee growers' financial behavior and incentives are highly complex, and electronic payment mechanisms need to do certain things just as well as, or better than, cash and checks do.
 The prohibition of cross-selling to card holders, meant to maintain the farmers' connection to the Federacion, not only hurt the business case for the bank; it also reduced the supply of additional financial services to hundreds of thousands of potential clients.
 The Cedula promotes formalization, something that may be unattractive to coffee growers and some cooperatives and merchants, who prefer to have untraceable transactions for tax purposes; overcoming this requires incentives for usage.
The next phase of the Cedula will benefit from all of these lessons, and the Federacion and Banco de Bogota are confident that the new product will generate a better and more valuable service for the coffee growers.
Note: The "Competitividad" program was first disbursed through the card (2008) and then through the virtual pockets (since 2009).
 Income - PIC subsidy to the coffee in fresh coffee. If the reference price per should belong to the ACH network.
2  the floods. The subsidy was in-kind, handing the required fertilizers and fungicides to control rusk in 294.000 Ha of coffee plantations and selected by Colombia Humanitaria as a good example because of the traceability.  If the farmer didn't have the Cedula or the municipality lacked the telecommunications infrastructure, the authorized input shops or cooperatives handed the fertilizers/ fungicides to the producer, for later reimbursement from the Federacion.
4 Fertifuturo y FertiYa In place during 2010. Incentive to cover the financial costs of forward purchases of fertilizers because of the fertilizers' excessive price increase during 2008 - 2009.  Coffee growers could obtain the fertilizers through two options:  Under a contract of sale of coffee, with future delivery signed with the coffee grower's cooperative. Through this option, the coffee grower would pay for the fertilizer when delivering the coffee negotiated in the contract, without paying interest.  Buying fertilizer in cash, the coffee grower would get a discount from the bill, which would be credited to the Cedula.
8 Coffee Price Protection Program to protect coffee growers' income from the international price of coffee volatility and the exchange rate fluctuations. Phase 1 (2009 - 2010): Protection, voluntarily acquired by the coffee grower for USD $5.2 per batch, to assure the price at which he will sell the coffee in the future. If the price is below the reference when selling the coffee, the difference would be recognized by the program. Phase 2: To encourage the risk management culture since 2012, the coffee growers could automatically debit the CPP from their Cedula balance from their cell phones or through a bank deposit. Phase 1: Cedula, transfers to bank accounts or cash. Phase 2: Cedula or bank deposit.
Of the subsidies, 640,000 were distributed in-kind. In this case, to calculate the approximate cost we used the assumption that for the disbursement the Federacion would have had to incur in the transportation cost of resources. Another way to calculate the cost would be to include the cost of purchasing and sending the inputs and fertilizers massively to the municipalities to be delivered by the department committees, input shops, or cooperatives, which imply a detail difficult to estimate for this exercise.
For cash payments, we used the cost of a bank transfer which is $3.13, taking as reference the maximum value paid currently by the Departamento para la Prosperidad Social-DPS for the bimonthly dispersions of the CCT from Familias en Accion ($60 per beneficiary) through the financial system. (Price reference published in the tender process 07 of 2012- DPS).
According to the contract, the bank assumed 100% of the issuance cost for the first 367.000 cards; from 367.001 to 412.000 cards the Federacion would assume $1 of each card's cost and thereafter the Federacion would pay 100% of the cost (USD $ 2.69).
This includes the cost of staff at the headquarters office, advertisement, program campaigns, and visits to the municipalities, which the Federacion estimates at $3 million. These costs are included in the three alternatives, considering that the Federacion would have incurred them anyhow. However, for the check payments, it is estimated that the cost would increase at least 20% because of the higher operative cost of checks issuance, transfer, and distribution in the different municipalities.
4 Average production over the past five years was 8 million 60 Kg bags, worth USD 2,034 millions (COP 3.9 billions), of which 90% is exported. In 2013, production significantly increased (35%) partly as a consequence of the Federacion efforts to renew coffee plantations and increase productivity, a process based partly in subsidies and grants paid through the Ceduia.
9 There is high participation in the elections; for example in the last elections, held in 2010, 64% of the federated coffee growers voted.
11 The FoNC is a fund with resources coming from direct contributions made by the coffee growers or from programs defined and financed by the government, and managed by the Federacion. The credit lines traditionally offered to the cooperatives to finance the purchase of the coffee crop have a one month term and can be paid back in coffee or money plus interest.
At the time, in 2006, the landscape of potential partners among financial service providers was not encouraging. Private banks had presence in only 28% of the municipalities (though covering 95% of the municipalities with more than 100,000 inhabitants).
2006 (decree 2233 of July 2006, by the Ministry of Finance and Public Credit), the banks faced difficulties using this new channel, especially in rural areas.
17 The original winner was Megabanco, a small-sized bank linked to the cooperative sector in Colombia who signed a 5-year contract. Soon after winning the tender, Megabanco was bought by Banco de Bogota, which assumed all the commitments from the original bank, including the contract with the Federacion. In 2007, Banco de Bogota offered some additional components (including connecting to other Grupo Aval ATMs and interconnectivity with other networks' ATMs, for which coffee growers would have to pay a fee when using for cash-out), and it signed a new contract, this time for 10 years.
23 A brief description of the programs and subsides for which the Federacion has used the Ceduia can be found in Annex B.
25 "Convenience stores" are stores where coffee growers could withdraw money at a special ATM provided by Banco de Bogota, an alternative for cash-out that was used before the bank agents regulation was issued in Colombia.
27 For simplicity, the data reported here refer to both the yellow and white cards collectively as the Ceduia scheme.
33 It is unclear how these resources compare to what would have been required to distribute a similar level of subsidies by cash, though checks would seem to require greater resources: issuance, physical transfer, and signature proof to hand the checks to the coffee growers.
Banco de Bogota only had authorization to use the coffee growers' information to issue cards, it can't check the coffee growers' status at the credit bureau.
For withdrawals, coffee growers will have to contact directly Banco de Bogota's support desk at a toll free number 018000 - 966010, option 4.