The numerous digital means of payment that are currently operative in Uruguay are designed to target the general population and particular segments of it to a different extent. They are therefore expected to have a distinct impact on the local and the global economy development. Overall money flows may increase through the use of cards, particularly those that allow differing payments along several time periods while almost all the instruments and policies described generate increases in the number of transactions within the formal economy (diverting them from the informal sector). Many of them further seek to improve social and economic conditions of the poorest households by promoting their financial inclusion and promote the formalisation of MSMEs. Given the high concentration of poor households within specific geographical areas (both neighbourhoods and communities) and the creation of specific retailer network linked to many mobile systems, they should also increase money flows at the local economy level. It is important to acknowledge that the emission of digital means of payment adds direct purchasing power to the market, particularly those that are based on credit, and hence apart from increasing the overall level of economic activity they may also generate significant inflationary pressures.
The concept of 'digital money' encompasses all means of payment that only exist in electronic form - credit and debit cards as well as transfers and payments made through the Internet - online payments - or else by sending a text message from a mobile phone -mobile money (or m-money). The accelerated development of ICT tools has provided with additional varieties of electronic instruments that can be used for an enlarged range of transactions (e.g., pre-paid cards; electronic vouchers), a process that has turned them into most widespread physical money substitutes across the world.
Many of the novel forms of digital money are supplied at a much lower price than that of traditional financial products, a feature that renders them accessible for potential users that self-exclude themselves from the market due to budgetary restrictions. This is particularly so for m-money in the case of individuals from households within the lowest income strata and of micro, small, and medium enterprises - MSMEs - given they would be entitled to get access to the system simply by owning a mobile phone. The low operational costs associated to mobile money systems are also at the root of the economic feasibility of penetrating unattended markets, such as isolated and/or small communities as well as agents that lack any collateral. The ease of operating the system and the consequent decrease in transaction costs act in turn as attractors for other groups of interest, such as young individuals and a share of the elderly (Cassoni and Ramada-Sarasola, 2012 and references therein). Therefore, m-money is considered to outperform other alternative currencies as a vehicle to boost local development and to allow for reducing overall poverty levels through the financial inclusion of vulnerable sub-populations.
The entry of additional actors to financial markets as, e.g., new money issuers (Cernev et al., 2012), and the changes generated in the mechanisms through which money flows within a country (Jack et al., 2010) is in turn expected to rise the money velocity to an extent that depends on the degree of adoption of the alternative currency (Al-Laham. and Al-Tarawneh, 2009).
One notable recent exception is the paper by Ramada-Sarasola (2012), who departs from noting that even though the Kenyan system - known as M-PESA - has increased local trade flows and has partially changed consumption patterns in rural areas, its design, founded on the delocalization of monetary flows, largely prevents to distinguish overall from local effects. The author builds a theoretical rationalisation that suggests that in order to magnify the local impact of digital money, a necessary condition is to combine its introduction with the implementation of local-oriented arrangements ('Alternative Currency Systems' - ACS).
long-lasting success (Moore and McKenna, 1999). The pre-existence of a large network of non-banking agents that may act as intermediaries is essential to reduce infrastructure investment levels. Further, in order not to restrain the participation of non-banking actors in the market, the regulatory and institutional frame of financial activities should be revised prior to the implementation of the system.
Even if the above-stated pre-conditions were granted, an economically feasible system has to overcome at least three additional obstacles that have been denoted by Mas and Ng'weno (2010) as scale, chicken-and-egg-trap, and trust.
The 'chicken-and-egg trap' of attracting both users and stores simultaneously is closely related to the reach of a critical mass of transactions (Mas and Ng'weno, 2010) so that the creation of an attractive outlet network with merchants and other agents, among which financial entities may be included, is of utmost relevance.
for overcoming the resistance to change that characterizes most populations is another dimension that has also been highlighted (Ngugi, Pelowski and Ogembo, 2010). The use of technologies linked to pre-existent structures and social systems is strongly recommended to sort out the latter (Heyer and Mas, 2009).
The expected impact of digital money on inflows, outflows and through-flows would depend on its degree of acceptance among individuals in the target group and also on the degree up to which it would have compensatory and substitution effects. Thus, a key factor determining the likely impacts of the system on the behaviour of its users is the characterisation of the sub-population of interest. Analogously, the actual role that the new currency might play largely depends on the variety of money-substitutes that are already in use among the target population.
In its essence, a credit card is a set of agreements between buyer, seller, issuing bank and credit card label. The buyer agrees to pay at a later date for the products that the seller agrees to deliver today while the issuing bank guarantees that future payment. The credit card label organises all the intermediation, the creation of a large enough network of buyers and sellers and the contracts with all parties. Commercially speaking, it is the seller that gives the credit to the client, as it delivers goods now and will receive payment later. The issuing bank takes the risk over the payments while the credit card label handles the entire process.
However, whenever the balance is fully re-paid in one instalment, free of any extra charge, such additional liquidity would be compensated within a month time. The role of credit cards in this case may be assimilated to that of an alternative means of payment since it enables to make a purchase prior to the effective disposal of an amount of money that will nonetheless be available almost immediately. A further use of credit cards as a substitute of money involves the automatic charge to their balance of monthly and annual expenditures related to home bills and taxes with no cost for the card holder (although a fee is charged to providers, regardless of their private or public character).
Uruguay. However, in November 2007 an upper bound to these rates was established by law in at most 60% over the prevailing average level, as published by the central bank (Law 18.212).
Credit cards also provide an easy and secure means to get access to money at any geographical location. In particular, the international character of credit card labels renders unnecessary for holders to carry large amounts of cash when travelling abroad, even in light of the high cost associated to the service. The relatively low relevance currently assigned to this specific use contrasts however to its being basically the sole attractor for Uruguayan holders in the past, a fact that partially explains the extremely low demand levels observed until the late 1990s.
It was only in 1981 that the first local processing centre emerged as a joint venture of two private national banks (Comercial and La Caja Obrera) that started to handle Visa and shortly after also MasterCard. However, this increased supply was not matched by the demand for credit cards that only involved 2% of the adult population by the mid-1980s most of whom used them just for purchasing abroad.
The creation of the first national credit card in 1985 - OCA Card - constitutes a milestone in the development of the market. Issued by a family-owned financial institution - Organizacion de Credito Automdtico - the card acted as a perfect substitute for the product the firm had supplied since its foundation in 1966 (the access to credit for local purchases by means of checks). As a consequence, the local market gained some dynamism, particularly after the appearance of a second national credit card in that same year - Plata Card.
The major financial crisis that took place in 2002 forced a restructuring of the sector that was reflected in the disappearance of credit card labels (as is the case of Plata Card); the reallocation of data processing centres (e.g., of Diners Club); and/or in their change of ownership (as, e.g., in the case of OCA, sold to Fleet Financial together with the BankBoston, that had acquired the company in 1998). In 2006 there were six credit cards labels operating in the country in alliance with local banks and other financial institutions -American Express (American Express Company); Cabal (Cabal Cooperativa de Provision de Servicios Ltda. from Argentina, Credit Uruguay Banco S.A. and Banco Bandes Uruguay S.A.); Diners (Citigroup); MasterCard (MasterCard Worldwide Inc.); Oca (Itau Unibanco Holding); and Visa (Visa Inc.).
It can be asserted that credit cards are currently of total acceptance and increasingly used in Uruguay. Even though they accounted for 36% of the total number of transactions in 2011, there is still a large unattended potential market (Banco Central del Uruguay, 2012). By the end of 2011 the number of credit cards has risen to more than 2.2 million while that of monthly transactions attained, on average, 5.6 millions. However, in contrast to the initially observed behavioural patterns associated to their use, the share of transactions that correspond to purchases outside the country is negligible (less than 2% in 2011). Similarly, only a minor proportion of credit cards are issued abroad (3.5%) while the majority of transactions (64%) correspond to cards issued by non-banking institutions. Nevertheless, the average amount spent by holders of non-banking card labels is less than half that associated to purchases using credit cards issued by banks (Banco Central del Uruguay, 2012).
3 Given the total adult population is less than 3 million, the figure is not as small as it may seem at first sight.
Debit cards started to be used two decades ago mainly as a means to withdraw cash and deposit money (cash and checks) from ATM cash machines and hence without being forced to attend to a bank branch. Cashiers in Uruguay became available at the beginning of the 1990s, when the Banco Republica (BROU) started supplying a limited number of services during the weekends through the RedBrou network. The 24-hours service was in turn first provided by the RedBanc network that involved a group of private banks, soon followed by the remaining private institutions through another network - Bancomat. In 2005 both networks merged into one - Banred - that thus became the largest in the market (gathering 15 institutions).
One factor at the root of the above trends relates to the progressive supply of additional services through cashiers. The inherent nature of some of these transactions, such as the possibility to pay for several public and private services, has further turned debit cards into an alternative means of payment of generalised usage.
within particular commercial campaigns while the government has favoured their use by linking it to tax exemptions.
The unbanked are not eligible as debit cardholders, except in the case of pre-paid cards. To date, there exists only one card with these characteristics in Uruguay: the AlfaBrou. Launched in 2007 by the BROU in association with Visa (and later on also MasterCard), the AlfaBrou allows for disposing of funds, both locally and abroad, that should be virtually deposited in advance. Deposits can be done at BROU branches; at the payment retailer network Abitab; online (through the electronic service of the BROU - eBrou); or by sending a text message from a mobile phone provided by the public telephone company -ANTEL. It is thus a perfect substitute for money at local and international stores and it also serves to pay for purchases done through the Internet.
Pre-paid debit cards would have a positive effect on the number of transactions observed through additional channels, such as those linked to online purchases. The fact that personal data that enters the web can eventually go public is one major reason that discourages a large share of credit card holders to participate in this sub-market that is further inaccessible for unbanked individuals. Pre-paid debit cards are however not subject to neither of these two binding characteristics since they allow for setting the amount of money exposed to online hacking to a minimum while holders are not required to have a bank account. Therefore, increases in money flows within the economy would be observed whenever the purchase involves a local seller. An analogous effect would be associated to the online transfer of funds among local users. Inflows/outflows would be instead linked to the reception/sending and/or the sale/purchase of local/foreign goods and services.
Conditional cash transfers programmes are intended to promote poverty reduction through the provision of income support to poor families (mainly aimed at improving nutritional standards and their access to health-care service); and also of incentives to invest in human capital. In the case of Uruguay, one key tool designed to achieve these goals is the Tarjeta Uruguay Social (TUS). The TUS is a pre-paid debit card issued by the Banco Republica and financed by the Ministry of Social Development (MIDES) that can be used for purchasing food and other basic consumption goods related to the personal and domestic hygiene. The target population is that of actual (or that are likely to become) indigent households (around 100.000), particularly those with members under 18 years old.
Once households are selected, household-heads become holders of a bank account at the BROU in which funds are deposited monthly by the MIDES and to which they gain access through the TUS. The card cannot be transferred and can only be used by its holder (who is required to show identification to shopkeepers) within a retailer network - Comercios Solidarios - the members of which are registered at the MIDES. Supermarket chains have no access to the network while MSMEs located in low-income strata neighbourhoods are strongly encouraged to participate in the programme. The only eligibility condition they have to fulfil is to be formally registered at the Tax Office (DGI).
Therefore, the TUS is designed so as to promote the purchase of food products with a high nutritional component among members of the poorest households; to provide incentives for increasing formalisation among MSMEs; to enable the financial inclusion of its users; and to create new communication channels between the most vulnerable segment of the population and government bodies. As such, it constitutes one suitable tool to reduce poverty and to allow for turning economic growth into development.
A parallel experience has begun in recent weeks with a segment of beneficiaries of the National Food Institute (INDA in Spanish), starting with a pilot among students mostly coming from countryside to study at the Universidad del Trabajo del Uruguay (UTU) - a technical institute that provides secondary and tertiary education in Montevideo. The pilot would involve a group of 200 students for the primary evaluation but the goal is to reach a total of 15.000 students in the short-medium term. The INDA credited in the students' mobile phones the value of a daily breakfast which allows them for paying their bills at any of the restaurants or cafeterias near their study centres using this virtual balance. In this way the INDA would ensure that low-income youth would have a good feed (at least at this initial stage) in the morning.
define not only on which items these transfers should be spent but also how this money flows through the local value chain. In that sense, the instrument offers new opportunities for influencing the secondary impact driven by these new money flows.4 In doing so, they could maximize the local economic development impact of these expenditures.
On the other hand, increases in money flows would be observed even in the short-run at the local economy-level as a result of the money transfers in which the programme is founded but also associated to the incentives it provides to local retailers to join the network.
Vouchers are an emblematic and well known example of a formally established "alternative currency" that may be offered by employers either exceptionally (as annual premia) or regularly (as a percentage of monthly wages). Although the most frequently used types of voucher are by far those exchangeable for food and groceries, they have also at times involved other items, such as transport costs (e.g., taxi fares or fuel); clothing: stationary products; books; etc.. They do not generate any cost neither to firms nor to employees, except for those that may stem from their use within a particular network of retailers, as is generally the case. The system is administered by private companies that charge retailers a certain percentage of the value of sales associated to vouchers (that varies between 2.5% and 7%).
Within the new regulatory frame enforced by the Tax Reform, vouchers are assigned the same status of monetary payments. They are thus included in the corresponding receipt and are taken into account to calculate the amounts to be paid during the annual leave. They are also subject to income taxes and included in the calculus of severance pay in case the worker is fired. The law further limits their value to at most 20% of the total monetary pay received by employees. Given the composition of household expenditures, food vouchers would not result in a diversion of any share of the total budget towards this type of goods (on average, 23% of the household budget is spent in food according to INE, 2008).
In principle, this kind of payments would not generate extra liquidity in the short run or changes in the consumption behaviour of employees, except for those linked to the increase in disposable income levels. In the long-run, however, the reduction in labour costs driven by the use of vouchers as a means of payment may result in an increase in the demand for labour, further fuelled by the rise in the demand for goods and services associated to the higher level of net wages. The reduction of public income levels (due to the exemption of taxes) would be consequently counteracted, at least partially, by the enhanced dynamism of the overall economy.
vouchers by virtual credits with one of the leading provider of vouchers in the market. The system would enable officials and employees to pay their bills using their mobile phones obviating the cumbersome administration of papers while improving traceability and avoiding losses or re-commercialisation of vouchers thereof. However, some adjustment to present legislation is still needed in order to allow the total replacement of vouchers by payments via SMS. In order that vouchers cannot be used to evade taxes, the Social Security authority (Banco de Prevision Social) currently forbids that food vouchers are paid for through any instrument payable to the bearer and/or transferable to third parties (R.D. 43-44/2005). In contrast, the new law on VAT rebates that also includes cellular telephony (using SMS) as means of payment for canalising the tax benefit is a strong incentive giving impulse to this adjustment.
Home banking and other forms of digital bank transfers have had a late start in Latin America, including Uruguay, where the delay is partially explained by its small potential market (due to the size of both the general and the banked populations). Further, since 1993 there exists a payment retailer network in the country - Abitab - that handles a wide variety of cash flows and transfers that involve individuals, firms and public agencies. The entry of a second network - RedPagos - in 2005 has meant an almost full coverage of the market granting an easy access for individuals and firms regardless of their geographical location. Services provided by these agents include the transfer of funds, payments to public and private entities (such as taxes, public fees, social security benefits, wages, credit cards instalments, shared expenses); the collection of donations and deposits for particular individuals or organisations; and even the purchase of tickets for all sorts of shows. Their highly efficient performance and the services' low associated costs are in turn at the root of their universal acceptance. The feasibility of business for these payment networks would be therefore largely jeopardised once online banking activities and other forms of digital money become of generalised acceptance. Nevertheless, there is still a long way to go given the recent introduction of these systems.
the payment of credit cards balances (for those issued by the bank where users have a savings or current account). A large number of additional online payments have gradually but increasingly become available along the last five years, such as the transfer of funds to accounts in other banks; the payment of taxes as well as Customs Office charges or other fees involved in foreign trade transactions; private services (e.g., monthly dues to institutions related to sports, health-care or education; contributions to ONGs and other associations; Internet services; etc.); or, in the case of firms, payments to providers. Other services demanded in a non-regular basis (e.g., the purchase of tickets for certain shows, catering services, etc.) are also available within a certain range that varies across banks.
As it stands, this alternative means of payment would not be related to changes in money flows neither at the global, formal or local economy levels. However, the ease of access to products offered by retailers all around the world implies an enlargement of the supply side of the goods' market that may result in an increase of money outflows, although to an extent that cannot be currently estimated. Further, even if no changes in the overall number of transactions were observed, the existence of online banking is most likely to rise the money multiplier given it drives a decline in the cash preferences of users.
Mobile money systems involve the provision of and the access to banking products and services by means of mobile telephones that are associated to virtual and/or bank personal accounts to which deposits are done through pre-existent banking and non-banking agencies. In the case of virtual accounts the system works analogously to those that involve pre-paid cards.
SMS payments are one of the mobile banking products that are slowly picking up in Uruguay. The services are available for clients of at least one of the three mobile phone companies - ANTEL, Movistar, and Claro - and may or may not involve financial agents. A private national company - Micropagos - operates the system.
Movistar also allows the recharge of pre-paid mobile phones through most of the credit cards (issued by both banking and non-banking agents) by sending an SMS. The service is also available for recharging a mobile phone on behalf of a third person.
Taxi fares and the delivery of cooking gas are also subject to SMS payment. Celeritas taxi company and the cooking gas provider Riogas are available for holders of savings or current accounts at Banco Santander while holders of OCA credit card within the programme OCA cel have access to the competing firms - Radio Taxi and Acodike Supergas - and also to Riogas. A wide range of additional products/services are included for OCA cel members, such as deliveries from stores within a retailer network that involve a variety of fields (e.g., pharmacies; restaurants; flower shops); cinema tickets; pay-per-view services from the cable TV system Montecable; as well as purchases at stores within a network. The largest retailer network to date is however linked to Creditos Directos S.A. through the programme Comcel that is available for holders of Tarjeta D.
Another service that can be paid sending a text message involves deliveries from suppliers to retailer stores. Until recently, payments were done through a magnetic card (held by the retailer) and a POS reader (carried on delivery trucks). Such technology has many downsides (POS readers are expensive to acquire, costly to maintain and operate, while the logistics of emitting cards are also costly), as opposed to the use of mobile money. A rollout of this system considers a 'prepaid' variant where the shopkeeper, that has cash money to pay for the delivered goods, can 'digitalise' this by making a deposit. The actual system is carried out using a card issued and administered by a non-banking national institution - Microfin - focused on providing financial services to MSMEs. The firm has received technical support from a Peruvian bank (Mibanco) since its foundation in 2008. As of today, the system is being re-designed in order to substitute the card by mobile money, a project that is also being supported by STRO that has provided with technology and know-how. SMS payments would render unnecessary for all actors within the chain of delivery to carry cash, which is not only important from a safety point of view but also in terms of efficiency, transparency and control (real-time information on transactions is available for the microfinance agency, the shopkeeper, the truck-driver and the supplier).
At this initial stage, only two products can be purchased (with no additional costs) by users that are not clients of the BROU - parking space in Montevideo and mobile phone recharges. Holders of an account at the BROU may use the system to recharge AlfaBrou cards (regardless of who is the holder) by sending a text message and also to transfer money to other users of ANTEL mobile phone service. The beneficiary will immediately receive an SMS with the code that enables the withdrawal of the funds from any BROU cashier without using a card of any sort. The funds are deducted from the sender's bank account together with the associated fees (2.5 dollars plus a 1% of the amount sent)5. The amount of each transfer may vary between USD25 to USD100 ($u500 to $u2000) while total daily transfers cannot surpass USD5006. Given that the access to funds is done through cash machines, the system only accepts transfers in multiples of $u100.
The generalised use of m-money would generate an increase in money velocity and a reduction of the cash to deposits ratio (a rise in the money multiplier). The enlarged money supply and the higher money velocity would both imply an increase in the number of economy-wide transactions. Such enhanced dynamism is expected to act as a driver of growth and development by means of enabling the financial and social inclusion of specific sub-populations as well as the reduction of informality. Significant impacts at the local economy level would in turn rely on the suitability of the system's design to promote the creation of local networks, particularly within poor and/or isolated communities.
The introduction of new digital money systems and the promotion of those already at work have become of increasing concern for Uruguayan policy makers along the last decade. The role these instruments play as drivers of financial inclusion suggests they are one suitable means for turning sustained economic growth into development, particularly when noting that the unbanked are 45% of the population (BROU, 2011).
The government's active policy to stimulate the digitalisation of the country involves the provision of the infrastructure needed (e.g., investment in optical fibre); the progressive supply of digital public services (that is being instrumented by a recently created agency -AGESIC) and tax exemption programmes (linked to the use of cards, e.g.). Furthermore, currently active policies oriented to specific target populations involve: the development of inclusion plans for the poorest households in terms of Internet connections (providing the necessary infrastructure and hardware) and of their access to financial products (through conditional cash transfers and tax exemptions); to MSMEs, in particular to informal establishments (through the creation of alternative currencies to be used in predetermined retailer networks and by offering access to cheap credit); or to particular sub-populations, such as young students (through subsidies).
Further, the results obtained from a survey performed on households within the poorest income strata reveals that a large share of them found that the system is easy to handle and quite reliable, as opposed to the apparent lack of interest shown by micro-entrepreneurs (most likely linked to their high degree of informality). The creation of a retailer network from the start (that is largely attractive to potential users according to the survey); the inclusion of saving opportunities in the system's design; and the provision of enhanced security mechanisms to deposit funds are suggested by the authors as most recommended strategies to attain success.
The C3 Uruguay project aims at creating a nationwide digital alternative currency in which the government commits itself to accept this alternative digital currency as payment for taxes and services. It is hosted on secure servers controlled by the national post agency - Correo Uruguayo - and runs on the Cycles software developed by STRO. The programme is further intended to reinforce the commercial capital liquidity of MSMEs and their linkages with other economic agents and to promote their access to cheap mutual credit that would allow for expanding business. These incentives are aimed at counterbalancing the 'benefits' that these agents would lose from exiting the informal economy. Possibilities are in turn being studied to connect the network to conditional cash transfer programmes (such as the Tarjeta Uruguay Social above described).
The government, through the AGESIC, is in turn committed to provide with access to ICT tools in a homogeneous and universal manner to all citizens, organisations and economic agents. A major goal of the AGESIC involves the planning and operation of the diverse mechanisms through which communication flows would be materialised. As such, it is in charge of the design of public policies and of giving permanent advice on the matter to both users and authorities. It is also responsible of monitoring the system's performance as well as of security-related features that should be granted to all actors involved.
regulations. One key aspect relates to the users' acquisition of identification in electronic form that should be provided by the national Post Office.
The Post Office is also unanimously considered as most trustworthy in handling private information services at the national and international levels, a characteristic shared by most post services in the world. Moreover, the fact that post offices in other countries are also becoming key actors in the digitalisation process of governments is an additional advantage (e.g., the Royal Post (UK); the Australia Post Corporation; the United States Postal Service; the Canada Post; the Deutsche Post; among others). A further benefit relates to the Universal Post Union (UPU) having established an international certificate that guarantees the safety of international money transfers all around the world. The Uruguayan post office is currently one of the 15 agencies in the world that also provide with the follow up of messages and/or packages using bar codes and it was the second that started to offer Internet tracking services (in 1997).
As part of the above digitalisation process, the Tax Office (DGI) launched a programme through which retailers would issue electronic invoices instead of in paper form. An ongoing pilot test started to be carried out in August, 2012 jointly with a major supermarket chain (Tienda Inglesa). The evaluation of the new system is hence still pending.
A critical dimension of the above-described process relates to granting access to digital public services and information to citizens on a universal basis. Therefore, the provision of nationwide infrastructure and ICT tools to vulnerable sub-populations has been a major concern for policy makers.
9 The ability to handle personal computers and to handle web services is by now a generalised requisite needed for most formal jobs while the demand for labour is largely and increasingly advertised through the Internet.
also intended to serve as a means of strengthening the linkages child-teacher-family as well as of promoting the involvement of other household members, particularly the parents, in the adequate use of ICTs.
The ceibalita has promoted an enhanced degree of socialisation among children through, e.g., a teaching-learning process around its use. Indeed, 87% of children declared to have taught their peers and/or other members of the household to use the laptop. It has also had a positive influence on attendance rates, motivation and learning abilities of the children, particularly at schools located in the most unfavourable contexts.
Policies that involve tax exemptions to all or some individuals (persons and/or firms) have traditionally been used as a means to promote specific activities (e.g., reductions in tax rates for imported equipment when there is an exogenous shock originated in a foreign country); as a counter-cyclical fiscal policy (e.g., when aimed at increasing consumption levels during an economic slowdown through a reductions in value-added tax rates - VAT); to benefit certain sub-populations (e.g., income tax reductions restricted to those that earn up to a pre-specified amount and that are hence intended to improve the overall income distribution); and/or as a means to alleviate a transitory situation (as would be the case of farmers facing a natural disaster). The focus may be set on tax rates linked to the value of diverse goods and services depending on the goal of the policy (production factors; financial services; intermediate consumption goods; final products).
On the other hand, the regressive character of consumption taxes in Uruguay, implied by the larger relative burden they represent for individuals with a low capability to save part of their income (Grau and Lagomarsino, 2002; Perazzo et al., 2002), was one key argumentation supporting the 2007 Tax Reform. However, the substitution of indirect by direct taxes has been poorly reflected on the VAT rate (that is only 1pp below its initial level) and hence the current initiative is also partially though of as a further stage of the process. Moreover, framed within the government digitalisation programme, the instrument would contribute to reduce tax evasion rates.
16 Due to MSMEs' lack of infrastructure and equipment (such as POS machines), the programme is not expected to be set in motion at least until the beginning of 2013.
18 Debate at the" 3er Encuentro Nacional de Cooperativas" that took place in October, 2012 in Montevideo. Available at: http://www.teveuy.com/?p=6021.
The AFAM is a debit card that allows for the withdrawal of social security funds for workers with children in low-income strata and also children and youngsters belonging to households considered to belong to vulnerable sub-populations. The full exemption of VAT also is granted in the case of purchases done with funds that do not stem from the above sources provided they are deposited in the account linked to these cards.
The instrument is therefore a further stage within the overall financial inclusion policy targeting members of low-income households and also within social programmes intended to improve the welfare of most vulnerable sub-populations by promoting the access to food products with high nutritional value and of hygiene-related goods. Formalisation and financial inclusion of MSMEs as well as the increased substitution of cash by digital means of payment (partially aimed at enhancing security) are further goals pursued. Lastly, as a means to promote the government digitalisation process, the application to the programme can be done online using e.g. the ceibalita.
One goal that is consistent with characteristics shared by all the above-described alternative currencies is the progressive digitalisation of money systems in Uruguay with its consequent increased traceability of transactions. The latter phenomenon is also linked to the use of recently released cards for individuals that are members of the poorest households that enable the full reimbursement of VAT from all purchases.
Many of these new means of payment also seek to improve social and economic conditions of the poorest households by focusing on particular dimensions. This is the case of the TUS and BPS-P that may only be used to purchase food and hygiene-related items. Markets unattended due to the non-profitability of business, such as rural areas or small communities, are also the target of policies and alternative currencies, such as the Plan Ceibal, mobile money systems or pre-paid cards.
cards, particularly those that allow differing and/or distributing payments along several time periods. The same effect is also driven by the rise in the level of disposable income associated to policies that allow for the total or partial exemption of taxes. The divergent rates of discount, in turn, imply that the largest impacts are associated to those that are used by members of the poorest households. The expected impacts are however different in the short, medium and long terms.
Given the recent character of many of these new phenomena as well as the lack of available data at the local level, the measurement of these impacts cannot yet be undertaken. However, the task is most relevant to evaluate the pros and cons of on going processes and should be taken in mind for future work.
BROU (2011). 'Microfinanzas en Uruguay', presented at the 'II Foro Nacional para el desarrollo de las Microfinanzas productivas en el Uruguay', May 20-21, Colonia, Uruguay.
Cernev, A.K., E.H. Diniz and J. Porto de Albuquerque (2012). 'Typology of Mobile Money Systems', mimeo, Social Trade Organisation - STRO.
Gonzalez, G, M. Montero, L. Olmos and F. Pelaez (2011). 'Un diseno de IVA Personalizado. Focalizacion de beneficios fiscales de acuerdo a la capacidad contributiva', mimeo, Asesoria Economica, DGI, Montevideo. Available at: http://www.dgi. gub.uv/ wdgi/agxppdwn?6.4.763.O.S.0.15577%3BS%3B4%3B870..
Heyer, A. And I. Mas (2009). "Seeking fertile grounds for mobile money", Enterprise Development and Microfinance, 22, 1: 30-44.
Instituto Nacional de Estadistica (2008). 'Los alimentos y bebidas en los hogares:  un factor de proteccion o de riesgo para la salud y el bienestar de los uruguayos?', Montevideo. Available at: http://www.ine.gub.uv/biblioteca/engih2006/Los%20alimentos %20v%20las%20bebidas%20en%20los%20hogares%20(versi%F3n%20final).pdf.
Jack, W., T. Suri and R. Townsend (2010). 'Monetary Theory and Electronic Money: Reflections on the Kenyan Experience', Economic Quarterly, 96, 1: 83-122.
Mas I. and K. Kumar (2008): "Banking on mobiles: why, how, for whom?", Focus Note 48, CGAP, Washington D.C. Available at: http://www.cgap.org/p/site/c/template.rc/ 1.9.4400/.
Ngugi, B., M. Pelowski and J.G Ogembo (2010). "M-PESA: a case study of the critical early adopters' role in the rapid adoption of mobile money banking in Kenya, The Electronic Journal on Information Systems in Developing Countries, 43, 3: 1-16.
Ramada-Sarasola, M. (2012). 'Can Mobile Money Systems Have a Measurable Impact on Local Development?', mimeo, Innovation & Research Multiplier- Social Trade Organisation (STRO) for the International Development Research Centre (IDRC). Available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2061526.