A report by the World Bank Development Research Group, the Better Than Cash Alliance, the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation and Women's World Banking to the G20 Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion.
This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank Group with external contributions. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank Group, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.
This report was authored by Leora Klapper, with the support of Pankhuri Dutt, of the Finance and Private Sector Development Team of the Development Research Group of the World Bank.
Inputs and guidance were received from members and other implementing partners of the G20 Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion (GPFI) including Argentina, Australia, the European Commission, Germany, Turkey, the United States of America, the Consultative Group to Assist the Poor (CGAP), the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), the International Finance Corporation (IFC), and the World Bank.
This executive summary outlines the role of digital financial services in improving women's economic participation, the challenges of increasing women's access to digital financial services, and the opportunities governments and other sectors have to foster an inclusive global economy in which digital financial services are widely available to everyone, especially women.
Improving access to credit, increasing access to insurance, reducing the risks of theft, and lowering administrative and disbursement costs are all ways that digital financial services support women-owned businesses. The financial footprint made possible through digital payments also allows for alternative methods of assessing the creditworthiness of women who do not have traditional credit assets or a financial transaction history.
 To an even greater extent than men, women often lack the identification documents needed to open formal accounts. According to World Bank research, 2 billion people worldwide in 2014 did not have any formal identification document, disproportionally women.
 Social and cultural sanctions prevent women from accessing financial services. For example, starting a business in a developing country often requires a visit to a major city center; but in many countries it is difficult or unacceptable for a woman to travel freely.
 The legal and regulatory environment does not enable mobile phone-based or other non-bank transaction services, and it does not encourage the development of a digital payments ecosystem.
 Adopt and promote a financial customer protection framework to ensure that new female customers are treated fairly and have sufficient financial skills so they know and trust digital financial services enough to adopt them. This should include adequate disclosure requirements and legally authorized redress mechanisms.
 Reform discriminatory policies that, in practice, make it harder for women to access or adopt digital financial services. Examples include requiring property or physical assets as collateral where there are limitations to women's ownership or requiring the signature of a man's to open an account or to borrow.
 Leverage their status as large payers and payees to increase access to - and adoption of - financial services by paying wages through digital financial channels, developing a digital supply chain, and increasing electronic payments by retailers.
 Provide a robust and reliable network for financial transactions as well as strong customer support to help address questions and deal with complications in the process.
 Collaborate with other companies and governments to increase women's use of services while lowering transaction costs by building an inclusive digital payments ecosystem.
 Develop alternative credit scoring models. This can be done by using data derived from mobile phone use or utilizing alternative methods designed for women who do not have access to traditional credit assets or a credit history.
driver of macroeconomic growth and stability in the years ahead. Yet female participation in the labor force has remained stagnant. It has even declined in some countries. Turning the tide requires innovative and informed policies and strong leadership. As this paper explains, it will be vital to fully leverage the potential of digitizing payments. Greater use of digital financial services can accelerate the inclusion of hundreds of millions of unbanked women in formal financial systems, leading to better lives for women and their families and more robust and inclusive growth.
This paper builds on the paper prepared for the Australian G20 presidency in 2014 - "Opportunities for Digital Payments" - by collecting and analyzing the evidence to date about how digital financial services can advance women's economic participation. We already are beginning to see technology drive growth in financial inclusion: In sub-Saharan Africa, 12 percent of adults (64 million adults) have mobile money accounts, compared with just 2 percent worldwide; and more than a quarter of adults in Latin America and the Caribbean receive a wage or government transfer payment directly to an account (Gallup World Poll, 2014). The key is to ensure that women around the globe benefit from this digital transformation of financial services.
Financial inclusion of women is essential for gender equality. It empowers women and gives them greater control over their financial life (Aker, Boumnijel, McClelland, & Tierney, 2014; Ashraf Karlan & Yin, 2010). That, in turn, can have a positive impact on an entire family household. Digital financial services offered through mobile phone platforms and agency banking, for example, allow women to transact safely and conveniently from their own communities, businesses, and homes.
While the advantages are many, significant challenges and barriers remain to making digital financial services more available to women worldwide. This paper identifies the challenges that must be overcome to increase women's access to digital financial services. It concludes by outlining the opportunities that governments, the private sector, and the international development community have to foster an inclusive global economy - one where digital financial services are widely available to all, including women.
Help bridge the gender gap in account ownership and increase women's participation in the financial system - both in terms of the volume and value of transactions.
Give women the opportunity to save formally, lowering or eliminating the high cost associated with saving informally.
1.1 Digital financial solutions can make a significant difference in bridging the gender gap in account ownership; they also can increase women's participation in the financial system - both in terms of the volume and value of transactions.
- a mobile phone-based service for sending and receiving money - increased the volume and frequency of remittances to family members and others in rural areas (Morawczynski O. , 2010). Another study found that in addition to increasing the frequency of transfers, the use of M-Pesa was noticeably associated with the likelihood that people were banked (Mbiti & Weil, 2011).
- may be less able to travel to the closest bank branch or meet minimum balance requirements. Indeed, Findex data show that in some countries, such as Kenya and Cote d'Ivoire, a gender gap exists in account ownership - but not in the use of mobile money service accounts. However, in other countries such as Tanzania and Uganda men are significantly more likely than women to have a mobile money account, as well as an account at a bank or financial institution (Demirguc-Kunt, Klapper, Singer, & Van Oudheusden, 2015).
about privacy and security, and low literacy levels. Encouraging the active use of mobile money accounts and increasing the use of a wide menu of financial services - including formal savings accounts and loans, insurance, and payment products such as debit cards - can be an effective way to lower the digital gender gap.
It is well documented that female-controlled finances are more likely spent on household expenditures, such as food and water, as well as child welfare including school fees and health care (Duflo, 2012).4 Globally, however, 80 million unbanked women receive government wages or transfers in cash; 210 million unbanked women receive cash payments for the sale of agricultural goods; 585 million women pay for utilities in cash; and 225 million women pay school fees in cash (Demirguc-Kunt, Klapper, Singer, & Van Oudheusden, 2015). With digital transfers, money is sent directly into a woman's account, and the amount and timing are private information. Their savings, salary, or daily wages can be deposited directly into their digital wallets on a daily basis and stored digitally, too. It might become harder for demanding family members and friends to access information related to these financial transactions. This gives women greater control over how money that is received and/or stored digitally is spent - and they can reinvest that money based on their needs.
1.3 Digital financial services give women the opportunity to save formally, lowering or eliminating the high cost associated with saving informally.
Governments can play an important role in creating a digital payments ecosystem and furthering financial inclusion by making and receiving payments to and from businesses electronically. This can help build infrastructure, volume, and familiarity with digital financial transactions on which business-to-business and consumer-to-business payments can grow. Women, in particular, could benefit from various types of digital financial transactions.
In addition to paying for goods and services, digital products such as debit and credit cards and mobile/Internet banking can help consumers keep track of their expenditures. Using these tools, consumers can set spending limits on certain items and control their household budgets by avoiding overspending.
Governments can digitize social transfer payments, providing women with a safer way to receive the money. Digital transfers ensure that women are the direct recipients of the intended payment. Digital transfers often come with an account that allows women to budget and save better versus a cash distribution. Governments also benefit because digitization reduces their costs and increases transparency.
Individuals can use digital financial services to pay taxes and fees such as license fees, registration fees, income taxes, and property taxes to government or government-owned agencies. E-filing and e-payment systems reduce travel time, face-to-face interaction with tax officers, and reliance on their subjective expertise on the returns filed (Doing Business, 2013).
Governments can use digital platforms to pay for goods and services, disburse loans and grants, and pay out funds for social programs, tax refunds, etc.
Businesses can use digital platforms to send e-receipts for purchases of goods and services, pay salaries and wages, transfer refunds on returned goods, and reach out to customers with business promotions. In a survey by GSMA, 67 percent of female business owners and 41 percent of women who did not own a business expressed interest in receiving services such as notifications of money transfers on their mobile phones (Cherie Blair Foundation for Women, GSMA and Vital Wave Consulting, 2010).
Women can send or receive remittance payments to or from their family members without dealing with cash. In 2014, 875 million adults, including 435 million women, received a remittance payment from a family member living in a different part of the country or overseas (Gallup World Poll, 2014). The World Bank estimates that remittances totaled $436 billion in 2014, an increase of 7.8 percent over the 2013 volume (World Bank, 2014).Typically, remittances are the largest source of external finance for developing countries.
2013b); improved consumption smoothing in the face of economic shock (Kast & Pomeranz, 2014; Jack & Suri, 2014); and greater legal and psychological control over their funds (Ashraf, Karlan, & Yin, 2006, 2010). In Kibera, Kenya, working women living as a part of a couple tend to use informal savings accounts much more than women living alone; they do so to protect their savings from their husbands (Banerjee, 2013 and Anderson & Baland, 2002).
Compared with informal savings schemes, digital financial services can give women an alternative instrument for saving money - one that provides greater privacy from family members and others who might confiscate the entire sum when a woman returns home with the "pot" (Anderson & Baland, 2002). The U.S.-based eMoneyPool and the Kenyan-based Chama Pesa are examples of digital ROSCAs which enable online or mobile payments between group members (Noor & Faz, 2015).
 For example, in a randomized experiment researchers studied the impact of greater access to bank accounts among small informal business owners in Western Kenya. The researchers found that market vendors, most of whom were women, used their bank accounts actively and, on average, increased their total savings. Because these accounts did not pay any interest and charged substantial fees for withdrawals, the net interest rate was negative. The researchers concluded that female vendors voluntarily chose to save in these bank accounts because saving informally had even higher negative returns (Dupas & Robinson, 2013).
 Safaricom and Commercial Bank of Africa's banking product, M-Shwari, uses the M-Pesa infrastructure to provide interest-bearing savings products to its consumers, paying interest of 2 percent to 5 percent annually (Di Castri, 2013).
Women are less likely to report having borrowed from family and friends in the past year (Figure 5). This form of social insurance and support often is less available to women than men, making access to formal financial services - including savings and credit - all the more important. For instance, 10 percent of men, on average, report borrowing to start or expand their businesses compared with 7 percent of women. In addition, 19 percent of men report saving for business purposes compared with 12 percent of women (Demirguc-Kunt, Klapper, Singer, & Van Oudheusden, 2015).
Diamond Bank worked with Women's World Banking to develop BETA (meaning "good" in pidgin English), a savings account that can be opened in less than five minutes and has no minimum balance or fees. Agents, known as BETA Friends, visit a customer's business to open accounts and handle transactions - including deposits and withdrawals - using a mobile phone-based application. By offering this account conveniently through the BETA Friends, Diamond made its services accessible and relevant to these low-income women, who proved to be a valuable market segment for the bank (Slama, 2014). Although less than half of the country is covered by banking agents (FSPmaps, 2015), the BETA program has more than 700 agents that have opened more than 220,000 savings accounts as of 2015.
This may be because most banks consider credit history, collateral, and business experience as important factors in their evaluation of clients for credit.
 Globally, women comprise 43 percent of the agricultural labor force in developing countries (FAO, 2014). However, they have limited access to land and credit (FAO, 2011) compared with men, which affects their ability to invest, expand, and benefit from new economic opportunities (WDR, 2012).
Evidence from rigorous randomized control trials is mixed about the impact access to credit has on female entrepreneurs. A series of studies showed no impact from small cash grants offered to subsistence-level businesses owned by women (Banerjee, Duflo, Glennerster, & Kinnan, 2015; de Mel, McKenzie, and Woodruff, 2008, 2009, 2012; Augsburg et al., 2012; Attanasio et al., 2011; Karlan and Zinman, 2010; Coleman, 2006). However, in some cases access to microfinance increased business ownership among women (Banerjee, Duflo, Glennerster, & Kinnan, 2015; Attanasio et al., 2011). The limited impact of microcredit on the growth of women-owned businesses may be because women own businesses in sectors that have a low probability of profitably and growth (Banerjee, Duflo, Glennerster, & Kinnan, 2015). They also may be forced to use a portion their business earnings on other household expenditures (Buvinic & Furst-Nichols, 2014). Yet a study in urban Ghana showed that larger women-owned firms increased their profits when given in-kind grants (e.g., inventory for business) (Fafchamps et al., 2014). For female entrepreneurs trying to start or expand their firms, digital transactions - such as utility and rent payments - are an increasingly important source of information for credit decisions, which might be especially important for female entrepreneurs who have no other credit or credit history in their name. Digital transactions can be used to build a credit history for women who want to raise capital from the formal financial market to start or expand a business. Digitization also can pave the way for new alternative methods of collateral for women who do not have access to traditional credit assets and do not have a credit history.
 Users of mobile money services in India like those offered by Grameen Koota, a microfinance institution, report benefits such as convenience and security of savings that women lack with cash. Mobile money provided a safe harbor for their savings, which made them eligible for larger loans (GSMA, 2010).
1.5 Digitization of financial services can reduce time spent on travelling to access banks or make utility payments.
 Research by Women's World Banking in rural Malawi showed that, like rural women in most developing countries, Malawian women fill many roles within their families. They lead domestic as well as economic activities at home, on the farm, and in the markets. Malawian women are unique in that they identify themselves as providers and have an expected role in saving for the family's future.
For a comprehensive look at the kind of economic activities women pursue in different regions, we refer to data from a recently concluded Gallup World Poll (2014). Figure 6 shows that lower middle income countries have the fewest women in the workforce. In India alone, 62 percent of women are neither wage- or self-employed nor looking for a job.
For instance, many women in Bangladesh reported using cash to pay their children's school fees. This costs them time and money, because they must often take time off from work to travel to the school to pay the fee (Klapper, 2015). By providing a digital platform to pay fees and conduct business-related activities, women can free up time to spend on paid work. That can improve their labor force participation. Digitization also can allow female entrepreneurs to connect with the marketplace virtually, and interact with customers and vendors from the safety of their homes or offices. In addition, women can join firms that allow them to work remotely and get paid through digital channels.
 Agricultural Insurance: Using a randomized controlled field experiment in Senegal and Burkina Faso, World Bank researchers found that female farm managers were less likely to buy agricultural insurance than male farmers, even after controlling for access to informal insurance and differences in crop choice. These women preferred to save for health risks associated with pregnancy and childcare rather than purchase agricultural insurance products. However, women who did invest in insurance had higher average yields and better managed food insecurity and income shocks (Delavallade, Dizon, Vargas Hill, & Petraud, 2015). Lack of information or poor access can be barriers to use of such insurance products. Female farmers could use digital platforms to secure agricultural insurance services. Moreover, women could use these services along with supplementary features like text messages about the advantages of risk management, etc. A mobile operator and an insurance company in Kenya jointly offer microinsurance to farmers to protect them against drought or excessive rains. The program protects more than 10,000 smallholder farmers in Kenya against extreme weather conditions. Weather stations automatically send data on rainfall to the insurance company, triggering payouts via mobile money payments when too little or too much rainfall is recorded. An estimated 46 percent of their clients are women (Manfre & Nordehn, 2013).
Evidence suggests that digital payments, such as mobile money payments, can offer a "resiliency dividend," especially among female-headed households, to protect vulnerable families against consumption losses in the face of economic shocks. Kenya's M-Pesa has reduced risks like "leaky" money transfers, delays, and high transaction costs for its users who want to transfer money to family members and friends. In a study of M-Pesa's role in reducing risk through lower transaction costs, the authors found that households in Kenya that did not use M-Pesa suffered a 7 percentage point drop in consumption after they experienced a negative income shock. The consumption of households that used M-Pesa was unaffected. This is because M-Pesa has been able to connect families and social networks in Kenya that are spread across the country by using SMS-based financial transactions. This means greater opportunities for women to find funds to keep a small business going, keep kids in school, and deal with medical and other emergencies (Jack & Suri, 2014).
During the 2014 Ebola crisis in sub-Saharan Africa, digital payments - first through mobile phones and later through bank transfers - allowed for quick, cost-effective, and accountable payments to more than 25,000 health workers in Sierra Leone (World Bank, 2015c).
"non-transactional" features including text messages and reminders. These services provide a cheap, fast, and effective way of marketing and managing digital financial products that is not available through conventional financial products. For instance, randomized control trials conducted in Bolivia, Peru, and the Philippines found that digital-based "goal-specific" savings reminders sent via text for school fees and housing increased savings by 16 percent (Karlan, McConnell, Mullainathan, & Zinam, 2012).
Globally, 23 percent of women (and men) report the cost of opening and maintaining an account as a reason for being unbanked. But female entrepreneurs often experience lower profitability and sales because of smaller business size, sector of operation, and lower investments in business (WDR, 2012). Therefore, these costs - account opening fees, minimum balances, transaction fees, etc. - account for a larger proportion of earnings among women-owned businesses. Empirical evidence shows that subsidizing the cost of maintaining a traditional bank account has a significant positive impact on the adoption of savings accounts among women (Dupas & Robinson, 2013 & Prina, 2013). Digital payments to suppliers and the government can reduce businesses' administrative and disbursement costs, including high transaction fees (e.g., for bank wires) as well as travel time, lost productivity, and travel costs required to make payments in cash.
1.8 Digital records can help entrepreneurs better manage their inventory stock and make more efficient procurement decisions.
 The Cherie Blair Foundation for Women, Self Employed Women's Association (SEWA), and Vodafone Foundation have collaborated to launch a mobile application to help women associated with an agricultural cooperative called Rural Distribution Network (RUDI) in Gujarat, India. The application, called RUDI Sandesha Vyavhar (RSV), helps women manage and track their sales through a basic mobile handset. Using this application, women can buy agricultural products from the RUDI distribution center and sell them to households in their village. They save considerable time gathering information about the products their clients want, and they can confirm availability of the ordered items in real time (Simavi, 2014).
Most women-owned SMEs tend to be consumer-oriented businesses that provide goods and services catering to women. They also tend to have more women in senior management (IFC, 2014a, 2014b). By using digital financial tools to collect customer payments and pay salaries, female entrepreneurs may increase the use of digital financial services more broadly among their female employees and consumers.
 Clients are hesitant about changing their conventional ways of savings, which are considered easy and more beneficial to them.
 Clients find it difficult to use mobile phones for PIN generation and cash withdrawal. Uneducated female clients find it very difficult to talk to bank representatives for PIN generation and verification process. They are unable to comprehend the process or provide the required details for verification.
 Religious reservations sometimes hinder financial inclusion of women through technology. Clients who observe the veil are reluctant to get their photographs taken and find it unethical on religious grounds.
2.1.3 Women and girls do not typically have equal access to education, and this continues to have a negative impact on their broader opportunities.
2.3.1 Legal barriers can prevent financial services from being offered to women, including those who own a business.
2.3.3 Financial service providers are not protecting consumers adequately, which means poor people in many cases are not treated fairly.
2.4.1 While technology and network infrastructure is reaching farther than ever, it is not always accessible or reliable.
2.4.3 The legal and regulatory environment does not enable mobile or other non-bank transaction services or encourage the development of a digital payments ecosystem.
2.4.5 Governments may not always be willing to invest in the digital financial ecosystem, given the delayed returns from investing in such projects.
 A Dhaka-based mobile financial services provider, bKash, reports that many women cannot open mobile accounts because they do not have the necessary government identity documents or birth certificates (Shrader, 2015).
In 2014, more than 2 billion people worldwide did not have any formal identification (World Bank, 2015a). This can limit their access to critical public services. Even though countries like India, Pakistan, and Kenya are working toward creating a database using a national identity card system, a gender gap still exists (Figure 7). The situation is worse in countries like Bangladesh, Nigeria, Uganda, and Tanzania, where a very small percentage of the population holds a government-issued national identity card. While it is common for adults in Uganda to hold some form of identity card, only specific cards - including a voter's ID, driver's license, passport, or national ID card - can be used to access financial services. The most common form of identity document in Uganda is a voter's card; but only 38 percent of Uganda's total population and 36 percent of women have one. Similarly, in Tanzania only 58 percent of the total population and 54 percent of women hold a voter's card, which can be used for accessing financial services (Financial Inclusion Insights, 2015).
In developing economies, 75 percent of women's employment is informal and unprotected (UN Women, 2015a). According to the Gallup World Poll, the gender gap in business ownership is most pronounced among wealthy business owners (those in the highest income quintile): 14 percentage points in the Middle East, 9 percentage points in South Asia, and 8 percentage points in sub-Saharan Africa. The trend reverses among adults living in the poorest households: The business ownership gap in the lowest income quintile is 9 percentage points in favor of women in the Middle East, 16 percentage points in South Asia, and 3 percentage points in sub-Saharan Africa (Gallup World Poll, 2014). Moreover, in spite of performing similar economic activities, women's earnings lag behind men's. In most countries, the earnings ratio is between 0.60 to 0.75 in a year (World Bank Gender Equality Data and Statistics, 2015). Another common trait among households in developing countries is that even when women are working, they are unlikely to make their own financial decisions. Gender remains significantly related to use of financial services in countries where laws and customs stymie the ownership, management, control, and inheritance of assets and property by women; that, in turn, hinders a woman's access to - and demand for - financial services (Demirguc-Kunt, Klapper, & Singer, 2013). In addition to lower income-generating capabilities, social sanctions that are often codified in legislation limit a woman's financial independence and autonomy - even among those with adequate financial and technical knowledge (IFC, World Bank, 2014). For example, in countries such as Niger and India men played a larger decision-making role over household expenditures. In countries such as India, Indonesia, Jordan, Turkey, and Egypt, women who reported paying for mobile services from their own money or household budget more often required permission to spend the money versus men (GSMA, 2015a). In Uganda, for example, having a family nearby was found to be associated with a negative effect on married women's business investment decisions, because the husband or his family demanded cash (Fiala, 2014). However, education and financial independence may increase use of mobile accounts.
2.1.3 Women and girls do not typically have equal access to education, and this continues to have a negative impact on their broader opportunities.
2.1.4 Women are, on average, less financially literate. Globally, men are likely to be more financially literate than women.
An empirical study in 12 upper-middle-income and high-income countries5 reported that women across all age groups, whether married or single, are less financially educated than men. Moreover, they are aware of their lack of financial knowledge. The gender difference in financial literacy also was observed among high school and college students (Lusardi & Mitchell, 2014). Women are not only less financially literate but also less confident about managing their money than men (Lusardi & Mitchell, 2008). However, according to another study, the gender gap in financial literacy and financial decision-making within a household was based on the spouses' level of education (Fonseca, Mullen, Zamarro, & Zissimopoulos, 2012). Results of the OECD Programme for International Students Assessment (PISA) financial literacy assessment, however, did not report gender gaps in financial literacy among young people, except in Italy (OECD PISA, 2014).
 USAID and GSMA partnered to give grants to Mumbai-based microfinance provider Swadhaar and Airtel Money - a mobile-based money transfer service - to promote the use of digital money services through financial literacy training for women. For this purpose, Accion - a nonprofit microlending organization -and Swadhaar developed training material using graphics, clear language, and peer educators. Early results show that the financial literacy training has helped women increase the use of Airtel's mobile money services for loan repayment, savings, airtime recharge, and bill payment (GSMA, 2015c).
Women tend to be more conservative about experimenting with new technology or financial products. This is why it is particularly important that services be consistently reliable. Their access to ICT tools through public Internet points, libraries, and Internet cafes also are often limited because of inconvenient hours of operation and unsafe environments (World Bank: Gender and Development, 2015). However, these trends vary across countries. For example, women more than men in the Philippines tend to teach themselves and rely on female peer networks to learn about mobile phone-based applications (Grameen Foundation, 2014).
the digital services have not been as popular as anticipated, because many women do not own mobile handsets, do not know how to use a digital device, or simply do not trust BISP because of irregularities in payment. Most of these women were illiterate and disempowered. They also reported difficulty in using the ATM and punching the PIN codes while using the smart cards (West & Lehrer, 2014). However, the jury is still out on the program's impact. One preliminary study - which conducted an independent evaluation of the program - found that the beneficiaries felt more empowered and reported benefits including freedom to spend their money, increased importance in their family, more decision-making power, and greater confidence (Arshad,20TI).
 Women in Kenya, Indonesia, and India reported that data costs discouraged them from using mobile Internet. This was linked to a lack of understanding about how data bundles were tied to usage (GSMA, 2015b). A survey of the microsavings clients of Cashpor in India suggested that female clients believed losing their mobile phones meant losing their money (Arnold, 2012).
 In developing countries, a measurable gender gap exists in the ownership of smart phones, use of data plans, and frequency of e-commerce activities. In select Arab countries, almost 70 percent of men reported purchasing and using these services versus only 30 percent of women (The Broadband Commission for Digital Development, 2010).
For example, entry procedures for starting a business in a developing country usually are centralized and registration requires a visit to the city center or capital. This can dissuade women in rural areas from formalizing their businesses because of time constraints or travel barriers. The transportation costs and time for setting up a business also can have an adverse impact on a business' finances. Consequently, most women-owned businesses tend to operate in the informal sector, especially in rural areas.
 In Botswana, almost two-thirds of microenterprises are in rural areas. They are owned mostly by women, lack registration, and operate from the home (Nsengiyumva et al, 2006). In Uganda, women work as unpaid laborers on family farms and also engage in small-scale informal, income-generating activities (Women's World Banking, 2009).
In high-income OECD countries, 83 percent of households have access to the Internet within their homes. In developing regions, Internet access ranges from 50 percent in East Asia and Pacific and Europe and Central Asia to 10 percent in South Asia. Women in developing countries are significantly less likely than men to have Internet access in their home. In South Asia, for example, women are half as likely as men (Gallup World Poll, 2014).
Ownership of or access to a device such as a computer or a mobile phone with Internet capability can encourage use of digital financial services. In a GSMA report, women from nine developing countries cited handset costs, airtime costs, and data charges as the main reasons for not owning or accessing mobile phones. The report stated that cost was a greater barrier for more women than men, because women in these countries were less likely to contribute to household income because they do not earn money, or earn enough money (GSMA, 2015a).
Yet some 1.7 billion women in low- and middle-income countries do not own mobile phones. And 200 million fewer women than men own mobile phones in low- and middle-income countries. In regions such as South Asia, a woman is 38 percent less likely to own a mobile phone than a man (GSMA, 2015a). The gap in mobile phone ownership also exists in sub-Saharan countries, where use of stand-alone mobile money accounts is becoming popular. For example, although 21 percent of adults in East Africa have a mobile money account, only 45 percent of women have their own mobile phone compared with 54 percent of men (Gallup World Poll, 2014).
Women who do not own an individual handset or SIM card may still have access to a mobile phone within their household or their community (Lucini & Evans, 2015). However, even women who do have access to a mobile handset do not always use it to make digital financial transactions.
 Another GSMA report on mobile Internet challenges in Asia noted that caregivers in Asian households, who are mostly women, usually are the last group to access or use a mobile phone. Even when they have access to a mobile phone, it is usually a feature phone with 2G Internet (Lucini & Evans, 2015).
2.3.1 Legal barriers prevent financial services from being offered to women, including those who own a business.
the sole administrative rights to manage marital property. In a study of 143 countries, almost 90 percent of the countries reported at least one legal difference that restricts women's economic opportunities, and 79 of those economies have laws that restrict the types of jobs that women can do (IFC, World Bank, 2014). In some developing countries, women need male guarantors or a man's signature to access formal financial services. Moreover, limited or no use of formal bank accounts in the past often discounts their credit history and, as a result, female entrepreneurs may find it difficult to raise credit from banks (Bouffay & Shallal, 2013).
The OECD collected gender disaggregated data for 14 member countries in 2009 and found that women, on average, owned 30 percent of registered sole proprietorships (OECD Statistics, 2015). Globally, the World Bank Enterprise Survey of more than 130,000 firms around the world confirms that in most countries only 30 percent to 35 percent of firms have female participation in ownership (Enterprise Surveys, 2015). However, in OECD countries, on average, women constitute only 18 percent of the board of directors in Forbes Global 500 companies.Their representation is much lower, less than 10 percent, in developing countries such as China, Brazil, India, and Russia (OECD Statistics, 2015). Globally, the percentage of firms with a female top manager is only 17 percent (Enterprise Surveys, 2015). This may suggest that while many women have ownership in businesses across the world, a very small percentage of women run businesses where they are exclusively in charge of the ownership and management.
 In Malawi, farmers clubs are one of the main sources of credit and extension services for small farmers. But they bar married women from full membership. Single women or women in polygamous marriages are not even considered for membership (WDR, 2012).
 In some African countries such as South Africa, Democratic Republic of Congo, Namibia, Rwanda, Swaziland, and Uganda, a man's signature is required to open an account for a woman. In countries such as Sudan, Lesotho, and Uganda, a man's signature is necessary to authorize domestic money transactions (Scharwatt & Minischetti, 2014; and Narain, 2009).
This may reflect a lack of awareness or willingness to act on the opportunity to serve women more effectively with a broader array of digital financial applications. The current digital market perceives women as receivers and men as senders of digital payments. Accordingly, the design and marketing of digital applications are usually focused on men sending money and women receiving money. Very few mobile operators target female business owners or workers (Scharwatt & Minischetti, 2014).
through voice calls, because even those who cannot read or write know how to use mobile phones to talk. Moreover, a literate farmer can use her phone to send and receive messages to carry out financial transactions on behalf of those who cannot read or write. The report concluded that ICT tools are assumed to be gender neutral - but are not. Even among smallholder female farmers, ICT tools must be customized to meet specific needs, which vary by profession, business activity, region, and social practices (World Bank, 2015b).
 For example, financial institutions in developed countries such as the United States and the United Kingdom began marketing insurance products in women's magazines. In the United States, ad campaigns were created to show that "modern" women make better financial decisions, eliciting positive responses from their consumer base (Burton, 1995).
2.3.3 Financial service providers are not protecting consumers adequately, which means poor people are in many cases not treated fairly; this erodes trust in digital financial services.
 M-Shwari has a simple pricing structure for loans that can be understood easily: Only one fee is charged for a loan that is payable in 30 days, and the same fee is charged again on the outstanding balance if the borrower does not repay on time. However, the terms and conditions of the loans cannot be accessed via the USSD session. Customers have to visit the Commercial Bank of Africa website for this information (Mazer & Fiorillo, 2015).
form or do not have access to digital services. Advances in these directions would benefit both men and women.
Digital financial services have the potential to benefit the poor. But it is very important for service providers to meet their expectations and provide a reliable network for financial transactions. Unreliable networks and inadequate customer support can create problems, including denial to access funds stored in m-wallets and complicated customer interfaces. That is on top of diluting the trustworthiness of agents carrying out the financial transaction. Such problems can discourage low-income consumers from moving to digital platforms and curb a large-scale adoption of such services (CGAP, 2014).
 According to Financial Inclusion Tracker Survey (2014), 64 percent of Ugandan mobile money users, 52 percent of Tanzanian users, and 48 percent of Kenyan users could not complete money transactions because of network failure (Sanford, 2014).
2.4.2 Spectrum is a scarce public resource, and how governments allocate this resource has significant implications for affordability and access.
2.4.3 In some countries, the legal and regulatory environment does not enable mobile financial services or encourage the development of a digital payments ecosystem.
 In China, the regulatory framework is evolving rapidly to both support the goal of financial inclusion through branchless banking and include active players such as banks, financial institutes, MFIs, MNOs, third-party companies, and innovative technology companies (Shrader & Duflos, 2014). For instance, to meet the demand for investment products, Alipay launched its money market fund, Yu'e Bao, in 2013. In a year's time, Yu'e Bao had around 100 million account holders and total accrued assets of RMB 570 billion. Because of the success of this product, many banks, Internet service providers, and mobile service operators have also launched similar investment products (Tang, Zhang, & He, 2014). Yet Yu'e Bao and its rivals remain effectively unregulated and there are liquidity and other concerns.
2.4.4 Lack of policy integration between the banking and telecom sectors is a significant challenge which, if left unaddressed, will make it difficult to provide the full range of formal digital financial services to women and men (World Bank, 2012).
Among the most urgent challenges relates to providing safe and reliable remittance services to women through formal digital financial channels. International remittances are a small but significant source of money inflow in many countries. In 2014, personal remittances accounted for 30 percent of the GDP in Nepal, 26 percent in Moldova, 17 percent in El Salvador, and around 4 percent in all South Asian countries (WDI, 2014). Digital financial services can help migrants have more control over the remittances sent to their home country (Ashraf, Aycinena, Martinez, & Yang, 2015). However, international remittances are much more diffiult than domestic remittances, because they often require partnerships between banks, international remitters, regulatory bodies, and governments to address risks related to money laundering or terrorist funding (Capal, 2014).
Governments generally avoid projects with long gestation periods, because the dividends from their success do not actually accrue to the government that implemented the project. Digitization is cost effective only after a minimum threshold level of user penetration is achieved (network effects) and service is streamlined. A long gestation period coupled with high initial capital investments in technology and infrastructure - as in the case of electricity - can make these projects particularly unattractive. Moreover, voters do not readily recognize the government's efforts or the eventual benefit. Even if the effort or the benefits are recognized, they are not easily attributable to the government. And while governments might not be opposed to the idea of empowering women through financial inclusion and digitization, it is important to address the related political and economic issues that can cause them to neglect providing such focused services.
 Operators usually incur heavy losses in the early years because of spending on customer acquisition and the expansion of distribution networks. They need roughly three years to break even, and can expect to meet positive profit margins of 2 percent to 5 percent only after they have at least 15 percent of their GSM base as active mobile money subscribers. In the absence of a digital ecosystem, this business model may not prove to be a lucrative investment for many service providers (Almazan & Frydrych, 2015).
 Digitization improves transparency. Consequently, many companies may prefer to continue using cash-based systems to take advantage of the cheaper costs of using underpaid workers and avoiding taxes.
3.2.1 Collaborate with other companies to increase the use of digital financial transactions while lowering the cost of these transactions.
3.2.3 Design products to meet women's unique needs and preferences in order to increase adoption of digital financial services that already are available.
3.3.1 Leverage their status as large payers and payees to increase access to and adoption of financial services.
The government also can digitize mechanisms for citizens paying the government, including registration and licensing fees, VAT and other tax payments, social security payments, etc. This also can help governments identify and target low-income households for tax returns, credits, and other benefits.
 In Malaysia, between 2006 and 2011, an increase in the share of electronically filed individual and corporate income taxes coincided with an increase in tax collections as a percentage of GDP (Doing Business, 2013).
 According to a Better Than Cash Alliance report, the Mexican government is saving an estimated US$ 1.27 billion per annum on its total spending on wages, pensions, and social transfers after introducing reforms to support digital payments in 2007. By the end of 2012, half of the federal salary payments and most of the pension and supplier payments had been centralized and digitized (Babatz, 2013).
Governments have additional incentives to facilitate digitization. Firms that receive electronic payments from customers have incentives to use "digital money" to pay suppliers. That digital payment improves transparency, because digital financial transactions make firms and transacting parties visible. This visibility, in turn, can increase tax compliance and tax revenues by preventing leakages from the informal sector. Digitization also can encourage the private sector to follow the government's lead. After the Pakistani government shifted to digital solutions for its welfare programs, several banks upgraded to branchless banking (CGAP, 2012a). Similarly, the hope is that a government's shift to digital payments - and the development of a supportive digital payments infrastructure - will encourage private companies to pay wages and salaries digitally.
Responsible digital finance requires that consumers should receive sufficient information to make informed decisions, that there are adequate market conduct rules that prevent unfair practices by financial services providers, and that consumers have access to recourse mechanisms to resolve disputes (AFI, 2014). Government disclosure guidelines - particularly regarding plain language and pricing transparency - can ensure that consumers have the information they need to make sound decisions and choose between different products. Market conduct rules can ensure that consumers - particularly women who be less experienced in accessing financial services or who may otherwise be disadvantaged or discriminated against in the marketplace - are treated fairly, and have the opportunity to ensure that they understand the products they are accessing, for example, through cooling off periods. Finally, governments can ensure that consumers have access to recourse mechanisms to resolve disputes, whether related to incomplete or incorrect transactions, loss of funds due to agent fraud, stolen identity, etc. Female consumers in particular should be educated about using and remembering their PINs, knowing the correct amount of money to be received during transactions, and what to do if something goes wrong.
3.1.3 Leverage new technologies to address the lower technical adoption and literacy levels among women in some countries.
3.1.4 Create a digital financial identification system to address the challenge that women often lack the identification documents needed to open formal accounts.
 India's Aadhaar program represents such an initiative, because it uses biometric authentication to create a central database of the nation's residents. Similarly, Estonia has "modernized" its national ID system (Dahan & Hanmer, 2015).
When governments support an agnostic and inclusive approach to a digital financial system, it can encourage competition among various payment methods in order to reduce costs and increase access - all while still ensuring integrity, stability, and protection. The industry also benefits from significant efforts on the part of the authorities to facilitate the necessary collaborative efforts and interoperability of transaction processing and access networks.
 In 2013, the Bank of Mexico introduced new regulations allowing mobile payment clearinghouses to participate in the central bank's real time gross settlement system, Sistema de Pagos Electronicos Interbancarios (SPEI). Mobile payment postings are expected to be faster than other SPEI transfers, because these interbank mobile payments are expected to be processed in less than 15 seconds from the time of initiation. The Bank of Mexico also has reduced the SPEI originating fee for mobile payments from USD 0.04 to USD 0.01 to promote this channel of payments and increase financial inclusion (BIS, 2014).
3.2 The financial services industry has a significant role to play in making digital financial services more widely available to women, because the industry is in the unique position to address many of the challenges and barriers outlined in Section Two.
3.2.1 Collaborate with other companies to increase the use of digital financial transactions while lowering the cost of these transactions.
This also can extend to collaborating on solutions to reopen formal financial services and products. The challenges section of this report outlined how strict regulations to combat terrorist financing have closed many formal remittance channels, because banks have closed the accounts of money transfer businesses. Banks and telecom companies can work together to address this issue. Customers who use digital financial payments associated with a SIM card can create "digital financial identities." In cases of suspicious or fraudulent financial transactions, it is possible to map the transaction flow to the cellular base station and agent location. With additional information from applications such as phone, data use, and geotagging, financial service providers can improve their network for identifying the source of such activities (Lyman & Noor, 2014).
 Tangaza Pesa, a mobile money transfer service in Kenya, registers and authenticates customers using fingerprint biometrics solutions which are secure and low in cost; they also eliminate the need for paperwork (Parada & Bull, 2014).
3.2.2 Develop alternative credit scoring models to address the challenge that many women do not have a traditional credit history.
 For example, Hong Kong-based AMP Credit Technologies provides a service that allows financial institutions to offer short-term loans to small business owners through the borrower's electronically verifiable cash flow - such as credit card payment activity - and other available data (http://www.amp-creditech.com/).
Many providers are waiting for women to adopt digital financial products without first questioning how these products can better meet women's needs. These providers also are not designing products to meet those needs in a way that would reach this untapped market. Financial institutions should conduct research to better understand the women's market, and design digital financial services to help women overcome barriers to access and become loyal and profitable clients.
 UBL Bank in Pakistan has partnered with VoiceTrust to provide voice biometrics solutions for authentication of its retail clients. This feature will have interactive voice response authentication in Urdu, in addition to English, which will be useful for women who do not know English or find it difficult to remember PINs (Parada & Bull, 2014).
3.2.4 Contribute to the adoption of a financial customer protection framework to ensure that new female customers are treated fairly and therefore trust digital financial services enough to adopt them.
3.3 Large businesses, including retailers and technology companies, can play a crucial role in supporting the creation of an economy where digital financial services are widely available to women.
 Paying wages through digital financial channels. In total, 37 percent of female wage recipients worldwide receive their wages in cash. These recipients make up more than 110 million women, with the majority living in developing economies. Larger disparities exist between high- and low-income regions. Eighty-seven percent of female wage earners in high-income countries receive wages digitally, while 79 percent of female wage recipients in low-income countries receive wages in cash of through other modes (Figure 12). Across all developing regions, women who receive payments from the sale of agricultural goods almost exclusively receive them in cash. In fact, 210 million women in the developing economies report receiving such payments in cash (Demirguc-Kunt, Klapper, Singer, & Van Oudheusden, 2015).
 Increasing electronic payments by retailers. This could be done by enabling female entrepreneurs who own retail outlets to have a safer, more transparent and more flexible means of making and receiving payments. Businesses providing financial transaction services - such as telecom companies and social network websites - can reduce the amount and frequency of customer data sharing by allowing consumers to share their banking data with the service provider only. This eliminates the need for transacting parties to exchange financial information like credit or debit card numbers or bank account details with each other (BIS, 2014).
This would include investments in spectrum, fiber networks, and electronic equipment, moves that would benefit from collaboration between governments and the private sector.
Interoperability should be expanded within and across all types of digital transaction service accounts, including card-based, mobile money, Internet, and bank accounts. MNOs can increase the use of mobile money services through interoperability. According to CGAP, new services and applications for depositing, transferring, and withdrawing money using mobile phones are emerging globally, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa and South Pacific countries. Account-to-account interoperability is now a reality, wherein subscribers can use different mobile network operators or digital platforms for financial transactions with mobile money accounts (CGAP, 2012b). Other countries which offer interoperability are Pakistan, Indonesia, Bangladesh, and Sri Lanka. In Tanzania and Indonesia, industry spearheaded the initiatives for interoperability. Experts from the payments and mobile industry guided Tanzania's transition: They put together a set of common business standards to govern person-to-person payments across countries. For this purpose, four mobile money operators - Tigo, Airtel, Zantel, and Vodacom - have agreed to operate through bilateral application programming interface (API) connections (Musa, Niehaus, & Warioba, 2015). Currently, M-Pesa and Tigo Pesa users can exchange mobile money in Tanzania (IT News Africa, 2015).
Financial technology (FinTech) service providers and marketers can work on this revenue-generating issue in both developing and developed countries. For example, Alibaba in China has rolled out an application for its Alipay Wallet users that authenticates mobile payments through facial recognition technology (Tyler, 2015).
Because women often are more risk averse, service providers must gain their trust to increase adoption on a large scale. They can do so by providing a robust network for financial transactions and strong customer support to help clear confusions and complications in the process.
Almazan, M., & Frydrych, J. (2015). Mobile Financial Services in Latin American and the Caribbean: State of Play, Commerical Models and Regulatory Approaches. GSMA.
Ashraf, N., Aycinena, D., Martinez, C., & Yang, D. (2015). Savings In Transnational Households: A Field Experiment Among Migrants From El Salvador. The Review of Economics and Statistics 97:2, 332-351.
Augsburg, B., de Haas,R., Harmgart, H, & Meghir, C. (2012). "Microfinance, Poverty and Education." Working Paper 18538. Cambridge, MA. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Banerjee, A. (2013). Microcredit Under the Microscope: What Have we Learned in the Past Two Decades and What Do We Need To Know. Annual Review of Economics 5, 487-519.
Blumenstock, J., Eagle, N., & Fafchamps, M. (2014). Risk Sharing And Mobile Phones:Evidence In The Aftermath Of Natural Disasters. University of Washington.
Capal, J. (2014, June 12). What Next for Remittances and Money Transfers in the Pacific? Washington, DC. Consultative Group to Assist the Poor.
BIS. (2014). Non-banks in Retail Payments. Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures. Basel. Bank for International Settlements.
Dahan, M., & Hanmer, L. (2015). The Identification for Development (ID4D) Agenda: Its Potential for Empowering Women and Girls. World Bank Background Paper. Washington, DC. World Bank.
- .(2009)Are Women More Credit Constrained? Experimental Evidence on Gender and Microenterprise Returns. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1:3, 1-32.
Deen-Swarray, M., Gillwald, A., & Morell, A. (2012). Lifting the Veil on ICT Gender Indicators in Africa. Research ICT Africa. Cape Town, South Africa.
Demirguc-Kunt, A., Klapper, L., Singer, D., & Van Oudheusden, P. (2015). The Global Findex Database 2014 - Measuring Financial Inclusion Around the World. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No 7255.
Doing Business Report. (2013). Doing Business 2014: Understanding Regulations for Small and Medium-Size Enterprises: Comparing Business Regulations for Domestic Firms in 189 Economies. Washington, DC. World Bank.
Duflos, E., & Klapper, L. (2015, May 22). New Accounts in China Drive Global Financial Inclusion Figures. Washington, DC. Consultative Group to Assist the Poor.
Ehrbeck, T. (2014, July 23). Can India Achieve Financial Inclusion within the Next Few Years? The Huffington Post.
FAO. (2011). The State of Food and Agriculture. Women in Agriculture. Closing the Gender Gap. Rome, Italy.
FAO. (2014). The State of Food and Agriculture. Innovation in Family Farming. Rome, Italy.Food And Agriculture Organization Of The United Nations.
Fiala, N. (2014). Stimulating Microenterprise Growth: Results from a Loans, Grants and Training Experiment in Uganda. Working Paper. German Institute for Economic Research, Berlin, Germany.
Gandhi, R. (2015, June 19). Women in Business: Can P2P Lending Bridge Gender Gap in Access to Capital.
IFC, World Bank. (2014). Women, Business and the Law: Removing Restrictions to Enhance Gender Equality. Bloomsbury Publishing Plc.
IT News Africa. (2015, February 26). Tanzania: Tigo Links Money Transfer Service Deal with Vodacom. IT News Africa.
Jack, W., & Suri, T. (2014). Risk Sharing and Transactions Costs:Evidence from Kenya's Mobile Money Revolution. American Economic Review, 104:1, 183-223.
Karlan, D., & Zinman, J. (2010). Expanding Credit Access: Using Randomized Supply Decisions to Estimate the Impacts. Review of Financial Studies 23:1, 433-64.
- .(2015). The Role of Informal Financial Services in Africa. The Journal of African Economies 24:1, 12-31.
Lahaye, E., Dashi, E., Dolke, E., & Soursourian, M. (2015). Spotlight on International Funders' Commitments to Financial Inclusion. CGAP Brief .Washington, DC. Consultative Group to Assist the Poor.
- .(2014). The Economic Importance of Financial Literacy: Theory and Evidence. Journal of Economic Literature 52:1, 5-44.
Manfre, C., & Nordehn, C. (2013). Exploring the Promise of Information and Communication Technologies for Women Farmers in Kenya. Cultural Practice, LLC, MEAS Case Study #4. Urbana,USA: Modernizing Extension and Advisory Services (MEAS).
Mazer, R., & Fiorillo, A. (2015, April 21). Digital Credit: Consumer Protection for M-Shwari and M-Pawa Users. Washington, DC. Consultative Group to Assist the Poor.
McCartney, A; Tilyayev, U. (2014). Garanti Bank SA - Combining SME Banking Excellence with a Proposition for Women Entrepreneurs in Turkey: Case Study. Washington, DC. World Bank.
McKee, K., Kaffenberger, M., & Zimmerman, J. M. (2015). Doing Digital Finance Right: The Case for Stronger Mitigation of Customer Risks. CGAP Focus Note 103/2015. Washington, DC.Consultative Group to Assist the Poor.
Miller, M., Reichelstein, J., Salas, C., & Zia, B. (2014). Can You Help Someone Become Financially Capable? A Meta-Analysis of the Literature. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 6745.
Napier, M. (2013, February 13). Market Building Through Financial Sector Deepening In Africa. Washington, DC. Consultative Group to Assist the Poor.
Noor, W., & Faz, X. (2015, July 13). The Global Landscape of Digital Finance Innovations. Washington, DC. Consultative Group to Assist the Poor.
OECD. (2013). Women and Financial Education: Evidence, Policy Responses and Guidance, OECD Publishing. Paris, France. Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development.
Nsengiyumva, A.,Ndiwalana, A.,Mutagahywa, B.,Stork, C.,Tusubira, F. (2006). Towards an African e-Index: SMEs Access and Usage Across 14 African Countries. Johannesburg. Link Centre, Witwaterstand University, Johannesburg.
Slama, J. (2014, March 5). Diamond Bank Storms the Market: A BETA Way to Save. Women's World Banking.
Schaner, S. (2015). The Cost of Convenience? Transaction Costs Bargaining Power, and Savings Account Use in Kenya. Working Paper.
Shrader, L. (2015). Digital Finance in Bangladesh: Where are all the Women? Washington, DC. Consultative Group to Assist the Poor.
Simavi, S. (2014, July 30). Spices and SMS: How Mobile Phones Transform the Lives of Women. The Cherie Blair Foundation For Women.
The Broadband Commission Working Group on Broadband and Gender. (2010). Doubling Digital Opportunities: Enhancing the Inlcusion of Women and Girls in the Information Society. International Telecommunication Union, UNESCO.
Whitman, E.A. (1893). The Cambridge Idea in Temperance Reform and Massachusetts Laws for Dealing with Drunkenness. Massachusetts Board of Managers, World's Fair.
Women's World Banking. (2014, November 26). Press Release: New Savings Account Brings Mobile Financial Access to Rural Women and Communities in Malawi. Women's World Banking.
World Bank. (2014). Remittances to Developing Countries to Stay Robust This Year, Despite Increased Deportations of Migrant Workers, says WB. Washington, DC. World Bank.
World Bank. (2015b). Supporting Women's Agro-Enterprises in Africa with ICT: A Feasibility Study in Zambia and Kenya. World Bank Group Report Number 93077-AFR. Washington, DC. World Bank.
1 According to the Global Findex (2014) database, 156 million more men than women have an account at a bank or other financial institution or mobile money provider.
7 Separation of property. All property acquired by spouses before and during their marriage remains separate property. Each spouse has sole control of their assets. This regime is the default in 46 economies.