The rapid growth of cities globally, particularly in developing countries, is placing huge pressures on governments to respond to the growing demand for decent, stable and profitable urban work opportunities. Yet there exist in every city huge networks of informal workers, covering almost every work sector, which sustain the city economies and provide livelihood opportunities for poor urban dwellers; though these livelihoods are often characterised by marginalisation, vulnerability, fragility and instability.
The work is underpinned by three interdependent normative frameworks: Technology Justice, Inclusive Economies, and Informal Worker Empowerment. Each provided a lens with which to analyse the findings of the work from unique perspectives, and which each seek to achieve inclusive, sustainable and empowering outcomes for informal workers. They key findings of the research are summarized in the paragraphs that follow.
Technologies were not found in and of themselves to be generating work opportunities. Rather, several sectors are seeing the introduction of technologies which - while making productivity gains and decreasing manual labour in particular work processes - have the potential to displace informal workers. Only those who are able to gain relevant skills to operate mechanised technologies, invest in technologies themselves, or are able to harness the positive transformative power of such technology developments will be able to benefit. The workers likely to bear the biggest cost of the introduction of new technologies in these sectors are those that are the most vulnerable: informal workers, in particular women.
There is a stark comparison between informal worker groups who have organised, and those that remain disparate groups of individual workers. Organising and collaborating with other relevant groups and organisations significantly improves organised worker's capacities to upgrade their technology options, to gain from technology advancements in their sector and keep up with the pace of change, and to soften the blows from negative impacts of technology change in their sector. It can also provide recognition and status in urban communities of their work and value to the city, which is an important means by which groups can start to advocate for rights and policies which are more responsive to their needs and improving their livelihood opportunities.
Despite notions of emerging technologies and disruptive innovations dominating contemporary discourses, informal workers are largely disconnected from such technological advances. At a firm level, informal firms are unable to seize competitive advantages from new technologies. In many cases, this is largely due to the relatively prohibitive cost of such technologies, and the faster pace of investment in higher technologies by formal firms. Thus their investments in 'new' technologies are often steps up 'technology ladders' (for example improved stoves, improved carts, or improved sewing machines), but still lag far behind investments by formal firms and workers into high technologies, which require greater capital investment, a more secure future, and sufficient space and security to store and operate the technology. This is compounded by the exclusion of many informal workers in urban areas from accessing appropriate finance products.
operations), technologies which are entirely changing the systems of service delivery (such as water 'ATMs' in Nairobi, and solar power systems for street vendors), and technologies which are changing the nature of work (such as mobile phones in Nairobi, and new sewing machines in Ahmedabad).
In some cases though, technology has empowered women informal workers. Mobile phones in Nairobi have enabled female soap makers to connect with customers far beyond their traditional customer base, to order supplies in a timely fashion and arrange to have goods delivered and collected. This has reduced their commuting costs and time and significantly increasing both their efficiency and income, as well as improving their safety. The reason mobile phones have become more accessible and empowering for women vis a vis other technologies is that there is are much lower entry barriers - they require minimal skills to operate, and these skills can be readily acquired, they are widely available and at an affordable cost, and their operating costs remain affordable for low usage, and there are established markets for repair and maintenance. Like energy access, they are a platform technology which can unlock positive impacts through enabling access to other technologies and circumventing existing gendered inequalities, for example in market transactions.
The presence or absence of equitable access to public goods, space, and services inhibits work opportunities, livelihoods and informal workers' ability to use or adapt technology. Examples include how street vendors' access to public space impacts the technologies they use and choose in their work. Where they have access to public space (such as the market vendors and emolienteros in Lima), they are more likely to invest in more "high" and expensive technologies and tools, versus those that lack access (unorganised street vendors in Lima). Similarly, equitable access to public or basic services such as affordable and reliable electricity is essential to informal livelihoods and directly affects how, when and whether certain informal workers such as garment workers choose to use particular technologies in their work.
Workers' potential for creating sustainable economies and utilising technology sustainably is curtailed by their systematic exclusion from central policies and regulations. For example, street vendors are being denied the opportunity to utilise more sustainable technologies, such as clean cookstoves, as they are kept constantly mobile by their lack of secure public spaces to operate, and denied their full profits because they are forced to bribe officials to maintain their operations for as long as possible. This thus denies them the opportunity to build up sufficient capital to invest into new, more sustainable technologies.
The future of work debates in the growing cities of the global south, and the roles technologies may play in shaping and changing those futures, must give strong credence to issues of urban migration, rights of informal workers, the transient nature of workers between informal professions, and the understanding that the focus on technologies must be on how technologies can be used by workers in an enabling and empowered environment, rather than specific technologies themselves necessitating change.
The potential of new, innovative technologies to positively or negatively impact the wellbeing of informal workers places the system of rules and incentives that guide technological innovation at the centre of the development challenge. This necessitates a broad view of technology, which includes a range of devices, processes and practices. Innovation is a diverse system comprised of goals, technologies needed to reach those goals, people and organizations who act within the system, and regulations, norms, and incentives that shape the processes.
Through a year-long project, Practical Action and WIEGO have explored the technologies, cities, work and systems that influence the disruptive impact of technologies on informal workers. The Technology & Future of Work project explored how the working poor are able to mitigate the negative livelihood impacts of technology disruption, or harness technologies to create new work opportunities in five cities (Ahmedabad, India; Dhaka, Bangladesh; Durban, South Africa; Lima, Peru; and Nairobi, Kenya). It also explored scenarios of plausible futures and how to ensure better outcomes for the working poor, towards a more inclusive city economy.
experienced in the technology-work nexus. By gaining a deeper and wider understanding of the factors determining technology adoption in informal work activities, it is intended that the research can be used to better inform informal workers of the risks and opportunities presented by technology changes in their sectors, and provide development actors and policymakers with a new perspective on how to craft inclusive economies - and the roles technology may play in doing so.
 "Technology" was conceptualized broadly and consistently with literature that conceives of it along three dimensions: first, physical tools and equipment; second, the skills, knowledge and processes required to use them; and third, the ownership or institutional arrangements around their use.
The Inclusive Economies approach at the Rockefeller Foundation is guided by the goal to expand opportunities for more broadly shared prosperity, especially for those facing the greatest barriers to advancing their well-being. Per the goal, the main characteristics of economies that are inclusive are understood to be ones which are equitable, participatory, growing, sustainable and stable. Informal workers by definition often lack social and legal rights and protections, and are some of the most vulnerable workers in economies. The discussion section of the report will examine how and under what circumstances technology can help create more inclusive economies for such workers.
contribute to the empowerment of informal workers, who, through their organizations can fight for more secure livelihoods. Each of these elements of empowerment are included in the conceptual framework and will therefore be discussed in the findings section.
The local level fieldwork took place in all five cities. Methods used included Four Turns & Technological Asset (4T&TA) photo documentation, storytelling micro-narratives, participatory focus groups, key informant interviews and worker profiles. Fieldwork done at the global level included a survey of informal worker organizations, key informant interviews and development of the Udadisi tech trend aggregator. These methods are summarized in the paragraphs below.
Key informant interviews were undertaken in all five cities with a selection of city officials, contractors higher up the value chain, local organizers, NGOs, and academics. These interviews focused on the technology changes, disruptions and plans at a city level and across value chains, highlighting some of the key decisions and changes taking place which may impact upon the work opportunities for informal workers.
The Udadisi tool (www.udadisi.com) is designed to enable the rapid exploration of key trends in the nexus between technology and international development. It scours the web from an initial curated list of sources, covering social media, academic publications and respected blogs.
Udadisi is intended to be used as a 'horizon scanning' tool, to be used by civil society organisations and others involved in technology and work issues within the three focal cities, to explore the range of emerging technologies, innovations and trends which may soon be shaping and impacting work opportunities in those cities. It may be used as either an "early warning system" of potential implications for workers and industries, or as a scoping mechanism for civil society organisations to better stay abreast of key technology developments in the focal cities and globally.
There is strong evidence to suggest that close to 100 tonnes of goods a day are moved by non-motorized barrow operators around the inner city of Durban (Dobson Interview). In Warwick Junction market in the city centre, they transport water, food and other goods for traders and the public using trolleys, barrows and other conveyances. The most common technologies being used by workers in the sector are very basic: different types of trolleys, barrows, rope and wheels (see Table 2 for examples of the conveyances used by barrow operators). In South African society, this form of manual labour is seen almost exclusively as a male work opportunity, with very few female barrow workers in Durban.
In discussing the inqola one barrow operator said, "It carries a heavy load, which allows for better profits" (FG 13, Durban) while another indicated the isigadla helps them to, "get money and be able to support our families" (FG 14, Durban). While income and productivity are considerations in their technology choice, the cost of repairs is also a factor which is a major influence. Barrow operators respond to the costs of repairs to old barrows by always trying to buy new barrows where possible, despite the expense (R1200). They use informal savings groups (stokvels) to fund the outlay.
Although the work of barrow operators is essential to many economic activities in Warwick Junction, their work and ability to adopt and adapt technologies to further enhance their work is hindered by the exclusion, harassment, disrespect and criminalization they face. Though Durban recently developed a non-motorized transport policy, it caters only for recreational cyclists and pays no attention to the needs of the barrow operators who transport tons of goods around the city on a daily basis. Focus group participants pointed out that there are often no pathways for them to use, so they are forced to operate alongside cars or simply cannot work in areas without pavements, decreasing their ability to work in particular areas and putting their personal safety at risk.
In addition to the contextual factors which impact technology choice and use, barrow operators also discussed the positive and negative impacts of particular tools and systems on their livelihoods and work opportunities. For example, one water porter noted how the efficiency of the inqola may impact workers: "...it [inqola] makes our work easy and faster but it also drains our body and reduces jobs opportunities because you can take a big load of water containers" (FG 13, Durban). Other barrow operators noted how the physical effort required to operate different trolleys and barrows affects their work: "If you use isigadla you suffer from back pain" (FG 14, Durban) and, "Inqola is not heavy without a load but when the water container is loaded it is very heavy to pull and it drains your body You are the engine of inqola  sometimes we even fail to come to work or only work five days and consequently that reduce profit" (FG 14, Durban).
Some noted that buses and taxis in some areas are inconvenient because they operate only during specific hours. They remarked that often they need to get to the city centre to start work very early in the morning (arriving at 1am) and public transport does not operate at that time. Others discussed how fare increases negatively affect their work: "If the prices go up, where we work is not easy to increase our prices because our customers will complain that we never informed them. For the past six years we were selling water for R2 ($0.14), so in order for us to meet the transport fare, we were forced to increase water pricing" (FG 13, Durban).
For female workers to enter into this profession in Durban, there would likely need to be both adaptations and innovations of the key technologies utilised by barrow operators, as well as a need to overcome many of the social barriers which limit their participation in the sector.
In India, construction workers, home-based producers (including incense stick rollers and garment makers) and waste pickers represent around 30 percent of the urban informal workforce (Chen and Raveendran 2014). Many construction workers in Ahmedabad are manual labourers sifting sand, mixing cement, and carrying cement and bricks; while others are skilled masons or carpenters using tradesmen's tools as well as machines. Both skilled and unskilled construction workers participated in the research.
The common tools used by these workers included: a shallow metal basin for carrying bricks and cement, a hoe, and a sieve for sifting sand (for the manual construction workers) and a trowel and plumb line (for the masons/tradesmen). Because they are often wage labourers, the construction workers' tools are provided by the contractor: "We do not have our own tools. Contractor provides the tools to us. We come with the lunch box only; rest all the tools or technologies are provided by the contractor" (FG 2, Ahmedabad, Construction).
Technologies such as a metal basin, hoe, chisel & hammer were the tools cited as most important for their work. Workers said they had mostly positive impacts on work opportunities as "both skilled and unskilled workers can use it [the hoe]" (FG1, Ahmedabad); it helps them work faster and more effectively (in reference to the metal basin) and they are able to get employment by using it (in the case of the hammer and chisel). However, because these tools are often associated with manual unskilled labour, construction workers frequently spoke of leg and back pain, the potential for injury while using some of the tools and breathing problems from inhaling dust during their work, all of which could have a long-term detrimental impact on their health and ability to work.
As one group of women construction workers reported: "Although there are many other technologies in this sector none of them are in the hands of women workers." (FG 2, Ahmedabad, Construction Workers). Focus groups with women construction workers also revealed that while they were somewhat dependent on mobile phones for communicating with their contractor or passing along work-related information, their husbands would not allow them to own a phone as they did not want them to communicate directly with the male recruiters or contractors.
In evaluating the positive and negative impacts of particular technologies on their work, all focus groups in Ahmedabad noted that the transport system was the most important system affecting their work: "If we cannot reach at labour area on time then we have to lose the wages for a day. Therefore to get the work; the first need is for a good transportation service" (FG 3, Ahmedabad, Construction).
Therefore, there are several challenges that workers in this sector are facing: financial and cultural constraints to acquiring and using the tools needed to access better opportunities, a shortage of training opportunities to become more skilled workers coupled with the entrance of machines which are replacing many manual tasks in the trade. Some of these dynamics may have a more heavy impact on women construction workers in Ahmedabad than men. For example, it is women that face cultural barriers to using and acquiring tools. And, based on the sample of workers who participated in the focus groups, women are doing mostly unskilled work whereas there were a greater number of men engaged in skilled work in the study sample. Therefore, a preliminary conclusion would be that the increasing mechanization will have a heavier impact on women informal construction workers than men in Ahmedabad.
Capital Investment "Zuki machines cost between 35 to 40 thousand rupees." (FG 4, Ahmedabad) "Flat sewing machine is expensive [...]A brand new sewing machine cost about R5000" (FG 4, Durban).
Work in the garment sector in Durban and Ahmedabad is becoming increasingly mechanized. However, unlike the mechanization taking place in construction and incense stick production, the technology emerging in the garment sector (i.e. electric sewing machines) is owned and operated by individual workers and is perceived to enhance productivity but not displace workers. The need to respond to industry trends is largely driving this shift: garment workers need modern sewing machines to enter the ready-made, especially modern, garment sectors (in the case of Ahmedabad) and to better compete in the traditional garment sector (in the case of both cities).
This was echoed by a garment worker in Durban: "Everything is done through a cell phone, we communicate with customers and suppliers" (FG1, Durban). Some garment workers in Durban also use the Internet and mobile applications like WhatsApp to communicate with customers, but this is not yet a common or widespread practice. For those few garment workers, using WhatsApp and text messaging has allowed them to communicate with customers more cheaply and enabled them to make garments to order for customers outside the city. In Ahmedabad, some garment workers were using cameras to document their designs or previous work.
Though workers in both cities are beginning to use ICTs such as cell phones, radio or the Internet for organizing, this is not yet a widespread practice. Many garment workers in Durban reported not knowing how to use the Internet, and, in general they are less organized. Despite this, cell phones are relatively widespread so where organizing activities take place, it is the primary ICT used.
In marked contrast, Ahmedabad City is known for regular electrical supply and high unit rates since electrical supply was privatized over 15 years ago. Despite the cost, the regular supply of electricity is a great boon to the home-based garment makers, most of whom operate electrical sewing machines. Therefore, while several acknowledged the high rate cost, on the whole, most garment workers who participated in the focus groups indicated the stability of the energy system had a positive impact on their work.
In Ahmedabad, the participating garment workers are all members of a strong and effective membership-based organization (MBO), known for worker training and savings and banking (among other services). These activities have resulted in loan finance that enables both supportive infrastructure (workers' homes) and capital for acquiring particular technologies . Therefore, the presence and performance of tools is facilitated by organizing, responsive support structures and access to skill upgradation (4TTA Analysis, Ahmedabad). In Durban, garment workers are in a public environment with access to reasonably protected and secure work spaces. Though they are not supported by an MBO, Durban has a fragile formal garment industry that, as a consequence, regularly upgrades or disposes of machines which indirectly enables informal worker to acquire machines at lower cost (4TTA Analysis, Durban). These factors, coupled with relatively predictable income/work (given that technology is acquired by garment workers to attract and undertake specific types of work) have facilitated how they choose and use particular technologies and the level of impact that mechanization has on their livelihoods and work, despite the ongoing instability and poor quality of energy supply.
For the women hand-rolling incense sticks, the most important assets are basic tools including wooden boards (where they roll the incense sticks), a basin/pan (to carry the dough, sticks and their finished product to the contractor), and a knife (for cutting the dough and cleaning the board and hands). For the women who work on machines, their most important tools include rolling machines, spanners/wrenches (to repair the machine in case of a breakdown) and a bucket (for putting dough in the machine).
"Machine is advantageous for the employer as he has to keep just a few machines and a few people. The machine works all the time, no leaves, no social functions, no excuses, in short there is no labour shortage or any labour related issue in case of machine work. So work is fast and easy" (FG2, Ahmedabad).
When asked whether any ICTs were important as tools in their work or organizing activities, they said ICTs were not used for work. Incense stick rollers contained in the sample were either working as wage labourers in small units in their neighbourhoods or as subcontracted home-based workers. Those in the small factories are not allowed to use phones or other ICTs during working hours. The subcontracted incense stick rollers operating at home are home-based but not homebound: it can be inferred they have relatively regular face to face interaction with their traders and suppliers given that they pick up raw materials from suppliers and deliver finished incense sticks to traders. These two factors may explain why ICTs were not listed as important in their work.
In discussing how particular city-wide technology systems affect their work, both hand rollers and machine users cited the energy system as the most important. Those that hand-roll incense sticks at home need electricity to be able to work at night and those that use the machines need electricity to operate them: "Electricity is important for preparation of dough. If electricity is not there then the dough cannot be prepared. The machine also needs electricity and three phase electricity connection is important for them" (FG3, Ahmedabad). All focus group rated the energy system as having a positive impact on their work. This is because while Ahmedabad City electricity has a high unit rate, it is known for having a regular electrical supply. Transport and waste systems were rated as less important for their work, given they are home-based.
The types of tools identified by the sector as "most important" for their work - scales, refrigerated display cases, knives/axes - have a relatively higher capital cost than some of the other sectors. The ability and willingness to invest in enhanced technologies here can likely be attributed to the fact that compared to some of the other sectors, market traders have a fixed and secure place of work (the market), with supportive infrastructure (water, electricity) and relative security to be able to do their work. This appears to be a clear enabler for them to be able to invest in productivity and income enhancing technology.
In addition to their work tools, most focus group participants also commented how they use cell phones for their work. Most noted that they use it almost all the time and that it is necessary for their work - to contact their suppliers about prices, to confirm deliveries or take orders from customers and to place orders for supplies so that they can save time and money related to transportation (Lima, FG12 and 16). Some focus groups participants also use cell phones for organizing purposes: to communicate with other members and to find out about announcements and meetings. However, they use their phone less for organizing than for work.
Initially, the Empresa Municipal de Mercados S.A (EMMSA) refused to let the market porters work at the new market location. Market porters were already organized and the Federacion de Estibadores Terrestres y Transportistas Manuales del Peru (FETTRAMAP) was able to negotiate an agreement with EMMSA. It was agreed that they could continue working in the market, a work regulation was issued and as part of the agreement, they were required to gradually transition to a mechanized model of transporting goods.
Market porters also highlighted how they use ICTs including cell phones, two-way radios, the internet and computers for their work and organizing. There is some variation in terms of the extent and amount of use of ICTs among porters because of differences in how work is organized for porters of different produce. However, in general, cell phones seem to be the most important means of communication for this sector, both for work and organizing. As a tomato porter explained, "We are always calling each other on the cell phone to advise that a shift is starting, to let each other know the trucks are arriving or about any change" (FG1). Green bean porters are using two-way radios to communicate in the market about the arrival of trucks and about shifts. One radio is left in the organization's office and the other stays with the tablero responsible for the schedule.
"The leaders of the association had to find ways to get in touch with their members and share the decisions and agreements [reached with EMMSA]. They also had to organize shifts and work schedules to show that they could handle the products better than other porters and that they could cover the demand" (Lima Micro-Narrative, Market Porters).
It can be said there is a hierarchy of workplaces for street vendors. For instance, among street vendors, some vend from baskets or mats on the ground, others from pushcarts of various types and sizes, still others from wooden carts with display units, and yet others from kiosks or other semipermanent structures. Such a hierarchy impacts on the technology choices available to informal workers, and also on the ability to utilise new technologies productively. Findings from WIEGO's informal economy monitoring study (IEMS) also indicate the lack of a secure workplace and a secure storage space, high costs for permits and rents, and high costs of transport inhibit investments in both technology and stock.
But street vendors in Nairobi also faced constraints in investing in new technologies, in particular in relation to spatial constraints and insecurity. Water vendors and soap makers complained of both a lack of space to store and use new technologies, as well as insecurities over land tenure and theft. As informal settlements are frequently torn down, and many residents in slums and informal settlements have no land titles for their properties, they shied away from investing in new technologies which could easily be removed or destroyed as they are forced from place to place. Equally, the lack of adequate housing and secure storage options posed a threat to those wanting to invest in new technologies over fears they could be easily stolen.
The issue of urban migration intersecting with poverty and work opportunities was particularly prevalent among street vendors in Dhaka. All of the stories signified as 'negative' came from recent migrants to the city, and workers signified that their stories had negative impacts on themselves and "others like them" (see Graph 1). This highlights that special considerations need to be taken to provide specific support to new urban migrants, who face challenges in integrating into their new environments and have comparatively fewer resources than their incumbent city counterparts. Initiatives which build their social capital could be critical to ensuring that these new workers are included in decent work opportunities in their new cities.
are also a critical technology. The research indicates that despite global efforts to increase uptake of improved cookstoves - those which are more efficient and cleaner-burning - most street vendors across the study cities continue to use the cheaper kerosene stoves. This is partly due to prohibitive costs, but also due to a lack of awareness of other technology options, or failures in the fuel value chains, where non-kerosene fuels are often unavailable.
The power of light is another crucial energy technology for street vendors. Without sufficient access to reliable and stable light, their hours of operation are curtailed, and their safety put at great risk as the days darken. Street vendors across the cities had varying access to power for light. Emolienteros in Lima, some of whom were part of an organised worker group, were able to secure permanent spaces for their trading vans and were able to access the grid energy system to use to power both lighting technologies as well as power for other technologies, such as refrigerators. Thus, security of place not only has an impact on the security of the work opportunities, but also on the technology choices available to the workers.
In Lima, street vendors (as with waste pickers) described how they used mobile phones to communicate with their fellow workers, to warn of any risks, and to communicate with suppliers, "It allows me to convey information in a speedy manner." (street vendor, Lima).
Mobile payments are only just beginning to emerge as a commonly-used technology in other cities, and no respondents outside of Nairobi cited their use. But given the impacts this has had on multiple work sectors in Nairobi, in terms of increased work opportunities, increased security (by not having to handle cash), and more reliable informal credit options, one can identify this as a key potential trend in positively changing work opportunities in other areas.
This highlights the need for public transport systems to respond to the needs of all communities within a city, and not just the wealthy living close to the city. Improving public transport systems which reach the areas street vendors use, live and work, could not only improve the viability of many street vending work opportunities, but also improve the safety of the workers, and provide opportunities for workers to invest in improved technologies for enhanced productivity, to create growing, inclusive economies.
Informal waste pickers provide vital services in each city, filling the vacuum left by public or formal private waste clearance services, in particular in hard to reach areas. Their work is also crucial to maintaining circular economies of recyclable materials, reclaiming vast quantities of reusable and recyclable materials from public waste. However, their work is often poorly remunerated, unrecognised, extremely unsafe, and utilising only the most basic technologies.
There were marked differences between informal waste workers across the cities, however. Those in Dhaka responded that the technologies in their sector had rarely changed. They also signified that in most cases they did not own the technologies they used in their work. This is in stark contrast to waste workers in Lima and Nairobi, who largely signified that the nature of technology in their sector has changed significantly in recent years; and in Lima that they were using modified technologies which they owned.
Informal waste workers in both Lima and Nairobi were central parts of hotbeds of frugal innovations. These included modified tricycles and custom-built motorcycle carts in Lima, used for transporting waste and recyclables across the city where workers teamed up with local craftsmen to design and develop their carts; and waste processing units in Nairobi, used for shredding, compacting and packaging card and plastics into uniform blocks which sold at a premium price, developed from scraps of discarded technologies in partnership with local civil society organisations. These findings highlight that when waste workers are given respect, recognition and stability in their work, they are able to create great opportunity from innovative technologies, with greater capital investments, often through collective pooling of resources through worker groups .
Moreover, though there are examples of technological investment in higher end technologies in the waste sector in Lima, only a few waste pickers in Lima can afford a modified moto-taxi to transport their recyclable materials, and they are mostly men. If women can afford a moto-taxi, skills may still be an obstacle to their making full use of it. One woman waste picker indicated while she owns one, "I still haven't learned how to drive it" (Lima, micro-narrative).
As such, city policies affect types of technology adopted by workers - at times leading them to downgrade because of punitive policies. In Durban, the waste pickers no longer carry knives or blades for fear of being arrested under the "Nuisances and Behaviour in Public Space" law adopted by the Durban eThekwini municipal council in June 2015. This restriction is particularly hard on the cardboard recyclers who need knives to break down cardboard boxes and cut rope to tie the cardboard pieces to their trolleys. Inappropriate tools for hazardous work results in occupational health and safety risks e.g. cardboard recyclers are reluctant to carry knives for fear of being accused of criminal behavior resulting in them using razor blades with exposed edges instead of box cutters, designed for the purpose. Wider policy issues can also impede technology options and work opportunities for informal waste workers. In Lima, companies refuse to sell insurance to owners of motorized three-wheel vehicles, a common technology used by waste pickers.
Yet city policies can also be positive and empowering for informal waste workers, also affecting the types of technologies they use. In Lima, where district municipalities like Los Olivos have included waste picker associations as part of the waste management system, waste pickers work more safely. They have better conditions than other parts of the city: for example, they receive recycled materials from neighbors, work during the daytime, and wear uniforms and safety gadgets. This creates more decent work opportunities, and greater work security.
In contrast, waste workers in other cities leveraged the power of collective action and organisation to improve their working conditions and work opportunities. This was also enabled through the fact that workers in most other cities owned their technologies and tools, unlike those in Dhaka. By gaining legal recognition and safeguards, as well as being provided with appropriate personal protective equipment, and respect and recognition through wearing uniforms, waste workers in Lima achieved greater security and recognition of their work in the city, so workers were more able to invest in new technologies and invest the time, effort and resources to innovate their technologies as well. Their uniforms also bring an added protective component to work, as the recyclers' vests, for example, have a reflective strip that helps make them visible at night, when many are out collecting waste from households. Through membership-based organization (MBO) and co-operative support structures, shared and / or supplied technology is available to enable, improve and dignify the waste collection activities.
For most waste workers, the energy system was not a pivotal aspect of their day to day work. The majority of their work involved manual tools, or mechanised transport. However, some workers in Dhaka and Durban noted the value of street lighting, which - where available - enabled them to work for extended and more flexible hours; "In winter, if the street lights are not on, we hesitate to arrive before the DSW workers due to the risk of operating in the dark" (Durban WP, FG 11, female). Some workers in Dhaka also noted that street lighting enabled them to collect waste before others, highlighting the competitive nature of such work, despite the marginal income available and the poor working conditions.
waste workers in Durban complained that, "When there is load shedding, the shops from where we collect recyclable materials close and we do not have access" (Durban WP, FG 10).
But interventions must also consider who will benefit and who will not. In Dhaka, there are highly gendered splits between different roles within the informal waste management system. Women are largely not allowed (through social norms) to be involved in the street collection opportunities, which also includes the retailing of separated recyclable materials. They are largely confined to the hazardous separation and sorting roles away from the streets. Thus men will benefit more than women from investments in energy service improvements, compared to investments in personal protective equipment, transport, or safe separation technologies - their critical role in the waste management value chain will remain out of sight and out of mind.
Public transport between workers' place of residence and place of work is often costly and infrequent or unreliable; and, typically, transporting goods is banned. Most informal workers have to resort to private transport of different kinds; or commute and transport goods on foot. "[The transport system] does not help us. Sometimes the buses do not want to pick us up...Sometimes I might wait until very late and they (buses) do not pick us up", argued a group of waste pickers in Lima.
The state of the road networks in each city also present huge challenges to informal waste workers, as well as fundamentally shaping the technology options available to them, and the innovations in technologies necessary to respond to those challenges. In Dhaka and Nairobi, there is a paradoxical relationship between the state of the road networks and work opportunities for informal workers. Where improved roads exist, it enables more automotive/mechanised waste collection technologies to be deployed as they are able to navigate the roads. As neither city has the capacity to deal with the full range of waste produced each day, both formal and informal actors operate, through contracts or through licensing. Those with more capital can invest in automotive collection technologies to operate in areas with improved roads.
But the regulation of "informal" waste work in Dhaka and Lima demonstrates different approaches to, and levels of recognition of, informal waste workers; and ultimately the technology options available to them. In Dhaka, workers can register with the City Corporation to collect waste from certain areas. But to register one must have a van - this presents a significant barrier to entry for many informal workers. Most vans require at least 2 people to operate it - a driver and a collector. In practice, entrepreneurs with access to sufficient capital tend to own the vehicles and lease them to informal waste workers who drive the vans for waste collection and receive a wage for doing so - but are not paid for the additional labour needed for collection.
Somewhat regardless of the transport system, privatization of waste management systems seems to have a negative impact on waste picker livelihoods. In Ahmedabad approximately 70% of the city is served by private waste collection. In parts of the city which still have municipal waste bins, waste pickers can reclaim waste but not all areas still have these waste bins and occasionally private garbage collection workers reclaim waste for themselves so access to waste is an issue. "It is difficult to find many recyclables in the dustbins as the municipal workers sort out and take the recyclables, so we have to go to nearby villages to find recyclables" (WP, FG 2, male). The often negative impact of privatization of waste management systems was also confirmed through the phone survey: the majority of organizations globally with waste picker members reported that privatization of waste management was currently impacting waste pickers in negative ways: reducing their access to waste and effectively banning them, even when they are organized into cooperatives, from bidding for solid waste management contracts.
By contrast in Lima, informal waste worker cooperatives and member-based organisations have successfully lobbied to be included in and recognised by city government plans and regulations and operate city-wide. Many waste workers operating in areas with improved roads have been able to invest in automotive transport technologies, including a range of modifications (see image 2 for example of a modified waste collection vehicle).
plastics and organics. The aim of the project is to empower youth. We work with 20 youths weekly, rotating each week, and train them in the process and how to use our three shredders. The shredded plastic is then sold at the market for around 40 shillings per kg. We hope to someday get a pelletizer, because plastic pellets sell for 120 shillings per kg.
It should be noted that although waste-to-energy incinerators were not raised as disruptive technologies in the cities studied, they were raised as negatively disruptive for both informal workers and the environment in both the literature review and the phone survey of member-based organisations. This could simply be due to the fact that these systems are not yet being considered in the study cities. However, where such systems were being introduced, the intrinsic link between waste to energy incinerators and privatised collection and processing contracts, meant that many informal workers were 'locked out' of such systems, as they were unable to bid for contracts and their access to waste significantly decreased due to the emphasis on burning garbage rather than recycling. They have also been seen to work in opposition to 'clean city' initiatives, such as the 'Clean Dhaka, Green Dhaka' policy, as they fail to reclaim much of the reusable material, and pollute the environment.
The research did not necessarily shed light on technologies which were in and of themselves generating work opportunities. Rather, several sectors are seeing the introduction of technologies which - while making productivity gains and decreasing manual labour in particular work processes -have the potential to displace workers. Only those who are able to gain relevant skills to operate mechanised technologies, invest in technologies themselves, or are able to harness the positive transformative power of such technology developments will be able to benefit. This raises questions, particularly with reference to worker groups including incense stick rollers, garment workers and construction workers, about the costs and benefits of particular technologies and their impact on work. The workers likely to bear the biggest cost of the introduction of new technologies in these sectors are those that are the most vulnerable: informal workers, in particular women.
For street vendors, market vendors, barrow operators and other informal worker groups, having access to public infrastructure such as electricity, water and affordable and well-located storage space are also essential to their livelihoods. In cases where workers have stable and affordable access to public goods, this has helped enable technological use and investment. For example, market porters in Lima who have access to secure storage at their workplace are able to invest in and store their pallets and stockers while market vendors in Lima who have relatively reliable access to water, electricity and storage have been able to invest in slightly more sophisticated technologies (such as refrigerated display cases).
Thus, creating environments in which workers can invest in new technologies, and with a degree of stability, is crucial to enabling more inclusive economies and supporting new work opportunities. Characteristics of such enabling environments include, inter alia, secure land tenure and/or the right to work in public areas, access to basic infrastructure at the workers' workplace (including for safe storage of technologies), regulations which recognise and support informal workers, targeted skills training opportunities, and innovative financial access initiatives which target informal urban workers (i.e. not based on rural-style collective credit/savings schemes).
The research has shown that organizing is a key pathway to facilitating informal workers' being able to access technologies, to capture the full benefits of technological change, or to mitigate the negative impacts of particular technologies. Organising not only supports workers to act together to advocate for regulatory change in their favour to create greater work stability and inclusion in more formal work systems, but also to share technical knowledge, jointly adapt and innovate technologies, and collectively invest in more modern or "high" technologies and/or storage space for them, to progress beyond basic tools and precarious livelihoods.
However, where work remains unsafe, irregular and badly remunerated, workers will seek to find alternative work opportunities where possible - particularly those where the skills and technology entry points are low. This is particularly the case in Dhaka, where few waste workers are organised, as few want to remain in this profession and often use it as a temporary stop-gap between other opportunities. But with waste a rapidly growing resource - and issue - to create a growing, stable and inclusive economy for current informal waste workers, proactive - and not just responsive -measures must be taken to integrate workers into policy initiatives such as 'Clean Dhaka, Green Dhaka', to reduce the technology barriers to entry in municipal waste management contracts, and to provide suitable personal protection equipment (PPE) to all waste workers.
The research highlighted that in each city, the responsiveness and supportiveness of key institutions, in particular city governments, was critical to the ability for informal workers to seize new - and better - work opportunities, to expand their entrepreneurial activities, and to harness the positive power of new technologies in their working lives.
local authorities. This therefore not only limited their technology choice vis-a-vis licenced traders, but also narrowed their technology choices to less environmentally friendly technologies, such as kerosene stoves.
Additionally, more stable market systems also helped informal workers in Lima plan for future technology investments and begin to develop business plans around such technologies. Emolienteros in Lima explained how the joint nature of both having formal recognition of their work, and a steadily growing local economy of working class customers, had helped them to gradually upgrade their technologies and make plans for both expansion of business and joint investments in technologies to improve productive efficiency.
On the other hand in Dhaka, institutions and regulations marginalise informal workers. They are not recognised in local policies, their rights to public spaces are insecure at best, and their lack of status in law leaves them to lead fragile and precarious livelihoods. This deters - and often prevents -workers from investing in new technologies and there are few if any safeguards to help them to mitigate negatively disruptive impacts of new technologies.
Equally, most informal workers and informal firms are currently low down on the 'ladders' of technology - those tools and technologies which have been around for many years, are affordable and accessible, and perform specific functions well. Thus their investments in 'new' technologies are often steps up this ladder (for example improved stoves, improved carts, or improved sewing machines), but still lag far behind investments by formal firms and workers into high technologies, which require greater capital investment, a more secure future, and sufficient space and security to store and operate the technology.
The groups who were most able to capture the benefits of technologies and innovate were those that were able to organise and collectively bargain for greater technology access, or collectively invest in new technologies. They were also those most able to connect with vitally important 'meso level' institutions, which act as conduits between technology developers and the workers. Such institutions included CSOs, NGOs, and local universities.
The findings of this research support those by ODI on the characteristics of successful and appropriate 'autonomous innovation' in developing countries; those that are inductive (arising from non-experts, the workers themselves), indigenous (arising from local needs and locally available resources), inexpensive (as workers have little capital available to invest), intuitive (those that don't require specialised skills or knowledge, and are 'good enough' rather than market leaders), and iterative (workers are regularly adapting and innovating basic technologies in response to changing opportunities and contexts).
earned less income from their work and hence could not afford alternative transport options, or did not own their own means of transport.
A contrasting example is the barrow operators in Durban - a sector which demonstrates innovation and adaptation in their work tools but which lacks a stable operating environment. Their tools are insecure as they have no space to store them and their work is unrecognized so they often face frequent confiscations of their tools. Their adoption of tools is therefore strategic as they lack a "stable" environment for their work.
The inclusion of informal workers in the delivery of public goods and services, such as water and waste management, is also critical to enabling workers to sustain livelihoods, while also providing services to populations unserved or underserved by public means. In Nairobi, informal water vendors depend upon access to water sources to which they can then bottle - and in many cases also filter - to retail to inhabitants who fail to be served by other systems. Yet in most cases, water vendors are considered to be illegally accessing water, despite its status as a basic human right and their role in delivering water supplies to otherwise unserved communities. They equally face issues with access to land and property rights, with limited, insecure housing and storage space. This limits their choices of technologies and inhibits them from operating within a stable, equitable, economy.
However, technologies which are able to be owned, adapted, and gradually upgraded by workers - in environments where they are able to access and utilise them - such as mobile phones, reliable energy supplies, waste processing machines - can improve the productivity and decency of work undertaken by informal workers. 25% of respondents across Nairobi, Dhaka and Lima signified that productivity was very important to their stories, with a further 30% weighting it equally alongside income and work security. This indicates that productivity and growth is important to the livelihoods of informal workers too, and thus embracing this and supporting it with both more responsive institutions (who include informal workers in planning processes), finance, and adequate access to relevant technologies, could unlock tremendous, inclusive economic growth.
While the concept of Technology Justice has been explored throughout the research in terms of the injustices in access to technologies, the unsustainable use of technologies, and the role of innovation in achieving decent work opportunity outcomes, this section will explore these aspects in detail with recommendations for future action to achieve Technology Justice for workers.
Despite the great potential of informal waste workers to deliver significant positive environmental benefits for cities, enabling them to deal with vastly greater volumes of waste, and importantly diverting all manner of reclaimable goods from landfill to other productive uses, informal waste workers are often overlooked in waste management systems. Their potential for creating sustainable economies and utilising technology sustainably is curtailed by their systematic exclusion from the central policies and regulations. Additionally, street vendors are being denied the opportunity to utilise more sustainable technologies, such as clean cookstoves, as they are kept constantly mobile by their lack of secure public spaces to operate, and denied their full profits by the bribing of officials to maintain their operations for as long as possible, thus also denying them the opportunity to build up sufficient capital to invest into new, more sustainable technologies.
The research indicates technologies which have greatest positive impact on the work and livelihoods of informal workers are those which have the greatest involvement in innovating, are particularly adapted to local needs, and can be readily owned and utilised by informal workers. This indicates that to truly achieve Technology Justice, to create empowered and decent livelihoods, and to craft inclusive, growing economies, measures should be taken to be inclusive of the needs, realities, and innovative, entrepreneurial potential of informal workers, rather than focusing on technology transfer of already created and non-modifiable technologies from elsewhere. This can to a great degree be achieved by improving and supporting worker knowledge systems and peer-to-peer learning platforms. The awareness of new technologies, the far greater role of local entrepreneurs, and the great deal of technology innovation and adoption of newer technologies in Nairobi appears in large part to be due to the far greater role played by intermediary or 'meso-level' organisations -researchers, NGOs, community-based organisations, youth groups, and others, particularly compared to Dhaka and Durban. Thus a key recommendation would be that strengthening the capacities of such meso-level institutions - particularly around knowledge sharing, innovation practices, and technology assessment could be instrumental in leveraging far more positive outcomes and inclusive economies for informal workers.
The key components of the informal worker empowerment framework include asset-building, organizing and capacity building. Organizing was found to be a key pathway in facilitating informal worker access and use of particular technologies. The research provides proof that having the appropriate skills - such as the ability and know-how to use new technology is one of the pathways to enabling informal workers to use technology to enhance their livelihoods. However, skills alone do not enable workers to be able to use technology. The ability to access and invest in a particular technology plays a key role in technological use and adaptation. Factors such as the presence or absence of a stable operating environment (i.e. access to a secure workspace, freedom from harassment), supportive policy which recognizes and supports informal worker livelihoods, and access to basic services and storage facilities, where present, were all shown to have an impact on asset-building. To secure the skills and assets, often organizing is key. Therefore, the three concepts provide a virtuous circle whereby through organizing, workers have greater likelihood of being able to harness the potential of technology, use it to create more secure livelihoods or mitigate against its negative impacts.
informal workers from the response side of the system ultimately works to create excluding economies and actively marginalises informal workers.
Yet in the cities studied and the workers engaged with, such debates are far removed from their realities, and are both obscure and irrelevant to either the workers' lives or their prospective job opportunities. While robotic devices may be replacing factory workers who operated forklift trucks in warehouses, such technologies are highly unlikely to have any impact on the work opportunities of market workers in Lima and Durban, who operate in shared spaces frequented by small-scale businesses trading in low-value goods, rather than secure warehouses trading in consumer electronics.
The future of work debates in the growing cities of the global south, and the roles technologies may play in shaping and changing those futures, must give strong credence to issues of urban migration, rights of informal workers, the transient nature of workers between informal professions, and the understanding that the focus on technologies must be on how technologies can be used by workers in an enabling and empowered environment, rather than specific technologies themselves necessitating change.
The key technology for Thembiso's work as a barrow operator in Durban, is his barrow. He and up to 1000 others transport around 100 tonnes of goods by barrow, on foot, around the city each day.
City context and institutions Barrow operators remain excluded from the city non-motorized transport policy. This means Thembiso's work is unrecognised and unsupported by a legal framework - and he has little recourse to the continued harassment by public, and confiscation of tools by authorities and police.
The key technology for Thembiso's work as a barrow operator in Durban, is his barrow. He and up to 1000 others transport around 100 tonnes of goods by barrow, on foot, around the city each day.
Thembiso brought together other barrow workers, to collectively advocate for changes to the citywide non-motorized transport policy and for secure storage at the marketplace.
The key technology for Deepa's work is her metal basin. However, she may begin to use grinding machines, cutting machines, mixing machines or digging and lifting machines as she upgrades her skills.
Organisation and Process Sangeeta stitches garments from her home. Because her home is her workplace, she is isolated from other workers like her. She is not part of an organization. Deepa therefore has little bargaining power to advocate for higher piece rates and basic services which could improve her productivity and allow for technological investment.
Because Sangeeta is isolated, working on her own at home, she has difficulty accessing information on training opportunities. Given how quickly fashion trends change, she has difficulty staying current with skills and techniques.
Like many other informal workers, Sangeeta lives in a slum with unreliable and unaffordable access to basic services (electricity, water, sanitation, improved housing, etc). Because she must cover her own costs of production and provide for her own utilities, this leaves her with very low earnings. Unreliable access to electricity also affects her productivity and ability to use machines requiring electricity on a regular basis. Her raw materials and finished goods are also vulnerable to damage from rains or flooding due to her living situation.
Urban transport routes do not adequately service slum areas where home-based garment workers like Sangeeta live. Rapid transit systems are unaffordable for workers like her. She spends long hours transporting finished goods and picking up raw materials using public transport, affecting her earnings and productivity.
The garment industry, like the construction industry is one experiencing increased mechanization of work processes with outsourcing occurring through increasingly long and complicated supply chains. Home-based garment workers like Sangeeta feel the downstream impacts of changes in design (and the resulting tools required to produce them) but often have little control over the production process. She will be pushed out of the production process if she cannot keep pace or adapt to these changes.
Sangeeta's earnings are very low so she faces difficulty in accumulating capital needed to invest in newer model sewing machines, gadgets for stitching buttonholes, hemming, and interlocking, embroidery machines and cutting machines. These newer model machines are necessary to enter the ready-made, especially modern, garment sector and to better compete in the traditional garment sector. Workers like Sangeeta risk being left further and further behind.
Sangeeta organized a group of other home-based garment workers to advocate for improved slum conditions with authorities and improved piece rates with contractors. Sangeeta's group has gained more control over the production process by organizing collective production units. Her group pooled their money to invest in newer model sewing machines, cutting machines, embroidery machines and other specialized machines for the production unit. Sangeeta no longer feels isolated.
Sangeeta and her group share information about new sewing techniques. They are better equipped to adapt and keep pace with trends in the ready-made garment industry.
The slum where Sangeeta and other home-based workers live is upgraded in situ with improved housing and access to basic services, allowing Sangeeta and other home-based garment workers (subcontracted or own account workers) to maintain their relationships with suppliers and contractors close to their homes. Sangeeta has more freedom and ability to operate newer model sewing machines requiring stable access to electricity and a can access more stable income.
The garment industry production processes continue to be mechanized however because Sangeeta has access to a wider breadth of tools and skills through her group, she is better equipped to respond to these changes.
Manjula is a home-based incense stick roller in Ahmedabad. The key technology in her work is her wooden board where she hand rolls incense sticks.
As a home-based hand roller, Manjula does not know how to use the new mixing machines or stick rolling machines.
Manjula and other incense stick rollers are well organized and have a decent relationship with their subcontractor.
Electricity in Manjula's slum is costly and not always reliable. It affects her productivity as she requires light for hand rolling. Because electricity is costly and unreliable, she has less of a desire to use mechanized incense stick rolling machines.
To keep pace with technological change, Manjula's organization decides to pursue collective ownership of dough mixing and stick-rolling machines.
Through her organization, Manjula learns to use the new dough mixing and stick-rolling machines. She has upgraded her skills and is able to respond to changes in the production process.
Manjula and her organization collectively pool their assets to buy new machines for incense stick making, Her group finds a space and creates a production unit close to the women's homes where Manjula and other incense stick rollers can work collectively.
Manjula's organization advocates for improvements to the electrical service and connections in her slum. They also negotiate for a written contract with the trader/subcontractor, providing them with a level of legal recourse and work security they did not have before.
Improvements are made to the electrical connections in Manjula's slum. This gives her and her group more confidence that investing in the new machines is worthwhile (given they operate on electricity).
The process of incense stick making is increasingly mechanized but Manjula and her organization are equipped with the tools and skills to respond.
Gilberto is a market porter in Lima. His work is essential to the operation of city markets, as he unloads the trucks that bring agricultural products to wholesale markets. He manually unloads goods from the trucks arriving at the market. His most important tools are baskets and crates (used to store and unload vegetables) and a hammer (used to repair the crates prior to carrying them).
The market management are planning to relocate and modernize the market where Gilberto works. He does not know how to use manual forklifts or the pallet system being contemplated in the new market.
Gilberto and fellow porters are not well organized. They are therefore unable to bring a united voice to negotiate with authorities or market management.
The work of market porters is regulated by law in Peru but not well enforced. The market Gilberto works in is soon to be re-located and modernized. The market management have not contemplated including manual market porters in the running of the new markets. They plan to mechanize the warehousing process (using manual forklifts and pallets) and outsource the process. Gilberto and other market porters risk losing their livelihoods.
In modern markets around the world, manual market porters like Gilberto mostly do not exist as they have been replaced by a few people who operate manual forklifts and pallet systems.
Gilberto and other market porters did not know how to use the manual forklifts and pallets at first. Market porters engaged in a process of "learning by doing". The management of the market also eventually provided a training on how to use the new tools.
Gilberto and fellow porters are well organized. Because they are well organized, they were able to advocate for inclusion as operators of the new manual forklifts and pallets with the market management. As an organized group, Gilberto's organization was also capable of demonstrating that they could manage the distribution of orders and goods within the market.
The work of market porters is regulated by law. Through advocacy, Gilberto and other market porters reached an agreement with the market management to gradually transition to a mechanized work process. To facilitate the transition, the market management provided the new tools to the market porters (pallets, manual forklifts). Gilberto's association has since collectively invested in buying their own machines which they regularly maintain and repair.
Main emerging tools include the manual forklifts and pallets. Market management initially provided these costly tools to market porters and Gilberto's association collectively pooled their assets to buy more pallets and forklifts to increase their productivity. Because they have storage space at their place of work, they have the confidence that their valuable tools are safe from theft.
Organisation and Process Maria Elena and her fellow market vendors are organized into an association in the market she works in. Though the organization exists, it is not very active.
Maria Elena is one of few lucky vendors able to secure a permit and fixed space in the market where she sells food. There are a relatively small number of well-located markets compared to number of vendors wanting to do this work. Most of the time, she can access basic services at her place of work including electricity, water and sanitation services though there are frequent cuts to electricity and it is difficult to run multiple appliances at once. Maria Elena is able to store her inventory and tools overnight at the market. Though the permit for the market stall she uses is expensive, compared to vendors who operate on the street, her workplace offers a level of stability and security which has allowed her to upgrade from a manual to an electronic scale.
Maria Elena uses the city public transport system to bring many of her goods to and from the market. It is hard to use the system as bus and taxi drivers often refuse to pick her up when they see she has goods. She spends long hours and a significant portion of her income on public transport.
In recent years, with the entrance of Chinese brands of digital scales, these "newer" technologies have become more accessible to vendors like Maria Elena. Though she would like to make other improvements to her stall - such as a new display case, the electrical grid capacity in her market means that she cannot run too many appliances at once.
The city is considering building new well-located markets in the city centre - in close consultation with groups of vendors. This could provide other vendors with similar opportunities to invest in appropriate technology and offer them a level of stability in their work which could lead to more secure livelihoods.
But there is great competition in this area, and she has no fixed place to operate - each day she must fight her way for a prime spot, and bribe the local authorities to ensure that she is not moved from place to place. Yet still they often force all the vendors to clear the area, leaving Monica to seek new, albeit less lucrative, spots from which to vend.
As the transport hub becomes increasingly popular as new businesses develop around the area, and the market too develops, city authorities impose a ban on informal food vendors in the area, with only formal, licenced units able to operate. Monica faces a daily battle to operate close to the hub, but despite customers liking her produce, she cannot compete with the larger licenced units which produce goods faster and at a lower cost. More affluent customers are wary of buying from her cart with worries about food safety compared to the glossy licenced units close by.
The municipal government presses ahead with their plans to ban stalls in this increasingly busy transit area, but agree to providing a designated space for traders to operate. While no longer in a prime location, the vendors do at least have security of space, and a well-lit area.
With the coming of the safe space and the improved storage unit, Monica takes advantage of the savings and lending scheme and invests in a new clean cookstove. With this, she is able to produce her goods at a lower cost, and no longer faces issues of smoke inhalation from the burning kerosene. She plans to also upgrade her cart to include an improved display unit.
Halim works as an informal waste picker, collecting waste from various households and businesses in a rapidly growing area of the city. He uses a manually operated cart to store the waste he collects, which he has modified with chunkier wheels and a wider storage compartment to enable him to navigate the badly maintained, narrow roads, and to carry a larger volume of waste in every trip he makes along the streets.
As the city government requires Halim to own an automotive van to register as an official waste collector, he faces increased competition in accessing waste in areas with better roads and businesses, which often have the higher value waste. He is pushed to the more residential and marginal areas of the city to collect waste where good roads are scarce. He has to make ever-more frequent repairs to his aging cart, which eats into his tiny profit margins.
The van-operating waste workers have received training from the city government in safer methods of processing waste, in particular e-waste, so now can work with more hazardous, high value materials, with fewer health risks; while the techniques Halim uses with abrasive chemicals have been outlawed by the city government.
Halim and other workers tried to get together to change their situation, but they had no resources and no knowledge of the political systems, nor what rights they had. Many of the workers left waste picking to take up other professions, often with the help of a family member already settled in the city, so Halim's group disbanded and felt disempowered to change their situation.
The city government invested in new fleets of automotive technologies, along with waste incineration plants to deal with the rapidly growing volumes of waste in the city. Their policies focused on cleaning up central metropolitan areas of the city, setting up private contractual arrangements. Halim was no longer able to operate in the central city areas, being seen as a beggar and threatened by local authorities.
There is no secure space for Halim to store his cart, and carts are frequently stolen or confiscated by police. Halim's cart is aging and needs frequent repairs. While he continues to make ergonomic adaptations to his cart, it is a poor substitute for the more modern automotive vehicles. As he also ages, he is less able to push around his cart. His health begins to show serious signs of degrading, and he has gradually less income and energy to invest into further innovations and adaptations of his cart.
Markets for recyclable goods are growing considerably, but the demand for higher quality materials means the loosely packaged and sub-optimal materials Halim is able to gather are in relatively decreasing demand.
Halim is able to jointly access new waste processing technologies with his fellow workers, enabling him to attain better prices for the materials he sells, and reduce the hazards involved in such work.
A new waste worker storage unit enables Halim and others to safely store both their collection technologies, as well as their unprocessed materials. As an experienced cart driver, Halim sets up a small mechanics business in the unit, helping new waste workers to fix and innovate their carts. This provides a new income stream, and allows Halim to reduce the hours he spends walking throughout the city, improving his health.
With a central meeting place at the storage unit, Halim is able work more with a range of waste workers, including those higher up the 'technology ladder' in the sector. A community based civil society organisation spots an opportunity to support these workers, and helps them to organise for more efficient collection - reducing intra-sector competition - and establish stronger, more equitable links with buyers of materials. This enables the workers to collectively negotiate prices and adjust to demand.
While government policies remain largely focused on promoting automotive collection from central areas, they recognise the need for efficient waste management services in harder to reach areas. Worker groups like Halim's successfully lobby to be included in local policies for waste management, and receive basic equipment, including uniforms, that bring them dignity, safety and recognition. However, their societal status as lower-caste workers means they remain limited in improving their livelihoods significantly, and working outside of the 'prime' waste collection areas hampers Halim's ability to generate strong, reliable profits.
Halim gradually learns more about the market demands in the waste sector, and is able to adjust his activities accordingly. Additionally, the community organisation supporting the waste worker group help him to access new technical knowledge to improve his mechanic enterprise, and expand his work also to servicing basic automotive technologies.
This leads to Halim being able to experiment with new ideas, adaptations and innovations. But he remains restricted in his efforts to innovate further due to the persistent lack of available credit finance options, given he remains living in a slum with few assets.