This Author Accepted Manuscript is copyrighted by the World Bank and published by Taylor and Francis. It is posted here by agreement between them. Changes resulting from the publishing processsuch as editing, corrections, structural formatting, and other quality control mechanismsmay not be reflected in this version of the text.
(1) You may use this Author Accepted Manuscript for noncommercial purposes only under a CC BY-NC-ND 3.0 Unported license http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/.
Urban problems can be categorized into economic (rising unemployment and underemployment, constrained access to financial services, market exploitation) and social (poor housing, crime, unsatisfactory health services and scant education opportunities).
The scope of this paper is limited to representative ICT initiatives that address job creation, financial inclusion, skill development and social capital enhancement. To qualify, the initiatives must have been established at least 5 years ago and must be currently operating successfully.
To inform this paper, the author has reviewed various publications, web sites and case studies. The literature review focuses on ICT characteristics that make them amenable for urban slum poverty reduction and their associated key building blocks.
Moreover, the ever shrinking mobile phone costs has the potential and has been used for uplifting the urban poor from poverty (Raha and Cohn-Sfetcu, 2009).
ICTs can also enhance social capital in urban slums (Sharma, n.d. and Spence, 2003). ICTs increase transparencies within societies fostering empowerment and accountability. ICTs can also facilitate profitable access to the global knowledge economy (Spencer, 2010).
Through their constant availability, ICTs can be used to facilitate 24 x 7 business transactions. This characteristic can be especially useful for urban slum dwellers who are highly socially dependent on one another for survival (Vedeld and Siddham, 2002).
On the other hand, adequate skills development, social capital accumulation and adequate infrastructure capacity have been identified as among the key building blocks for sustainable economic development (Kuriyan, Ray and Kammen, 2008). New sectors of the economy, especially the services industry, require advanced skills. Relevant skills development can help the urban poor address impediments to new and better opportunities. Accordingly, the urban poor needs to be information literate beyond computer literacy i.e. have the ability to access, evaluate and use profitably information from multiple formats. (Anderson and Bikson, 1998 and UN Commission on Science and Technology for Development, 2007).
Ultimately, however, connectivity depends on a robust infrastructure. The recent proliferation of affordable mobile telephone services offer opportunities to urban slum dwellers to increase their earnings.
On another level, mobile telephones offer low cost solutions relative to conventional fixed lines. World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS) and other international ICT players recognize the promise of these technologies in rolling out infrastructure to more people more rapidly, at lower costs (UN Commission on Science and Technology for Development, 2007).
Virtualization technologies that use low cost low power computers costing as little as $70 each in a Local Area Network (LAN) (Dukker, 2007) or a cloud computing model2 remain viable options. These models are cheap. They can also be made more secure, more easily maintainable, and feature a dramatically reduced energy footprint.3 However, this paper has not been wholly focused on these models.
has been developed by looking at the functional capabilities of the mobile phone, the Internet and virtualization computing in the context of socio-economic empowerment.
Franchisees require a PC to connect to the M4G platform which allows them to add new services, manage existing subscribers, generate reports and maintain a database of communications. The M4G platform connects to mobile operators over Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) using a Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP). According to OneWorld UK, the first project started in 2003 in Kibera in Nairobi. At launch, it had helped more than 100 people find jobs every week. Within one year, with nearly 100,000 users and 80,000 unique subscribers, over 60, 000 people had secured jobs through the service. The service advertises 150-200 job openings weekly. 60-70 percent of these are filled by SMS recipients of the information. As of 2006, the service had broken even with US$100,000 yearly revenues (Balancing Act, 2011).
Babajob is a job site started in 2005 in Bangalore India. It is owned by Babajob Service Private Limited (BSPL). By March 2011, it had expanded to 6 other Indian cities (Delhi, Mumbai, Hyderabad, Thane, Jaipur and Chennai). It currently has 16 employees, more than 60,000 customers and sending out in excess of 1 million job alerts monthly.
Babalife.com, available in local Indian languages, acts as the social intermediary. It interfaces seamlessly with an SMS service and combines blogging with photo and video-sharing.
Babajob's innovative job creation solutions have received wide attention including in internationally circles. See for instance Giridharadas (2007).
6 On its website Babajob jobs lists jobs such as IT Professionals, Customer Representatives, Nurse-maids, Drivers, Housekeepers, Cooks, Child Caretakers, Gardeners, Security Guards, Construction Workers, Garment Workers, Office Helpers, Delivery Helpers, Receptionists, Cashiers/Retail Clerks.
Esoko earns revenue by putting advertisements in messages and by collecting economic data which it sells to advertisers subject to privacy regulations. Among the recent success stories is a sale of organic fertilizer facilitated by TradeNet between a person in Yemen and another in Nigeria at rates far more competitive than the seller would have otherwise received (Economist, 2007).
According to the ITU, similar projects are underway in other parts of the world. Trade at Hand in Burkina Faso and Mali funded by United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), provides daily fruit and vegetable exports price information.
Account opening is available 24/7. Low transaction fees with no minimum balance requirements and no paid media advertising ensure lower costs. A monthly fee currently set at R19.99 (approximately US$3) includes funeral cover for subscribers which, enhances the utility of the service.
Within 2 years of operation, WIZZIT had employed more than 2000 Wizzkids and by 2010, had processed nearly 3 million transactions and opened over 250,000 accounts with over 12,500 monthly new additions (Bassiri, 2007).
owned a bank account and had never used an ATM (Mola, 2006). Over two-thirds of users find it convenient and safe. 70 percent of users view it as cheap (as much as one third cheaper than comparators in the big retail banks). 70 percent of users also find it fast. WIZZIT has also enhanced shareholder wealth by eliminating risks associated with carrying cash (Ivatury and Pickens, 2006).
ABC was launched in 2009 by the Niger Food Security and Nutrition Program and the Catholic Relief Service (CRS) to improve adult literacy in Niger. ABC uses multimedia mobile phones programmed with a digital curriculum in the local languages of Hausa and Zarma. It also incorporates a literacy component. Local facilitators teach the two component program.
Nearly 1 and half years after ABC's launch, Aker, Ksoll and Lybbert (2010) found substantial improvements in literacy and numeracy test scores. Adults' math test scores increased by .32 points during the first year and 1 out of 4 students attained a higher level of numeracy. Students transitioned from an inability to recognize any numbers to successfully completing simple addition and subtraction problems. According to this study, both literacy and numeracy effects are stronger and statistically significant for younger populations. Results from the first year of the program also suggest that ABC increases students' test scores better than the traditional literacy curriculum. This effect continued even 8 months after the program, the learners having been tested without any prior knowledge that they would be.
According to Table 2, mobile phones and the Internet hold the most promise for ICTs for poverty reduction in urban slums. This is consistent with their perception as predictors of success in most available literature. The case studies in this paper make exclusive use of these technologies. On the other hand, virtualization computing, as represented by local area networks and cloud computing, while not currently in use in these projects, might present tremendous opportunities for cost savings. They remain possible candidates for adoption going by the evidence provided in the literature review. This suggests that ICT projects with a poverty reduction mission could possibly benefit from their use but these technologies may not necessarily be a requirement for the projects' success. Future application and research in specific similar projects may yet determine their necessity.
and Project ABC.13 But these may not be the only policy prescriptions. They are only representative of a wide array of other possibilities.
At least 8 peculiar characteristics emerge. They are technology/network interoperability, local/multiple language use, local content application, relevancy to local context, broad-based wider reach, affordability as measured by ability of several people to own the technology, easy potential for scalability and inclusiveness.
13 In both cases, respective governments have given specific concessions to telecom companies in exchange for connectivity and service in commercially less competitive areas.
Interoperable networks are just as critical. WIZZIT for instance, has been largely successful because of compatibility with all mobile phone networks as has been M4G with its goal of replication in other geographical areas.
Anderson, R.H. & Bikson, T.K. (1998). Focus on generic skills for information technology literacy. Washington, DC: Rand.
Economist Print Edition. (2007, Jan 25th). A plan is a foot to create a pan-African market based on mobile phones.
Gates, B. (1999). Business @ the speed of thought: Using a digital nervous system. New York, NY: Warner Books.
Kao, J. (1996). Jamming: The art and discipline of corporate creativity. New York, NY: Harper Business Publishers.
Pigg, K.E. & Crank, L.D. (2004). Building community social capital: The potential and promise of information and communications technologies. The Journal of Community Informatics, 1(1), 5873.
Rahman, H. (2006). Role of ICTs in socioeconomic development and poverty reduction. London, UK: Idea Group Inc.
Vedeld, T. & Siddham, A. (2002). Livelihoods and collective action among slum dwellers in a mega-city (New Delhi). Oslo, Norway: Norwegian Institute for Urban and Regional Research.
Woolcock, M. & Narayan, D. (2000). Social capital: Implications for development theory, research and policy. The World Bank Research Observer, 15(2), 225-249.