Technological advancements have reduced globol poverty significantly in the past 100 yeors Although many people have been able to leave poverty due to this, however, still more than 1 3 bi llion people live in extreme poverty Extreme oc is defined os having less than SI 25 to spend every doy There ore a wide variety of co uses for poverty, which differ per country, but in general causes for poverty include- lack of educotion, environmentol problems, lack of access to bonking facilities, lock of legal ownership of property, lack of rule of law, overpopulotion, epidemic diseases or changing trends in o country's economy.
Economic security includes registration of property ownership, access to banking facilities and a fair and tronsparent rule of law, which includes rules that everyone understonds and respects. Especially in developing countries these three economic securities (property ownership, occess to banking facilities and rule of law) ore often locking. As a result, these countries often hove a lorge informal economy, which results in less respect for ownership or financial and legal rights, moking it expensive to obide by the law.
Informal economies exist in every country of the world, but take up a larger chunk of the gross domestic product (GDP) in developing countries. The informol economy is the part of the economy that is neither toxed or controlled by any form of government. The larger the informal economy, the more insecurity exists far citizens, which can result in unrest and poverty Due to lack of dato, determining the size of the informal economy is difficult. However, Mexico determined in 2014 that the informal economy contributed on overoge 26 percent to their GDP over the decade from 2003 to 2012. That s o large chunk of the economy that is not controlled or monitored and as such affects millions of people.
Unfortunately, economic insecurities ond poverty hove a negotive side effect Many different orgonisations try to help the poor, all with the best intentions. However, these organisations are operating in silos ond eoch of them has their own database with informotion on the citizens they try to help As o result there is no centrolised overview, leaving the person in need without any information or credit history that could be used to improve their situation, while requiring eoch organisation to maintain their own databose. Thus, being poor is often very expensive, resulting in a negative vicious circle and an increose in poverty in already poor countries.
Increased occess to banking, availability of rule of law and respect of property ownership reduces the size of the informol economy Reducing the informal economy has significont advantages including increased government protection for consumers, accumulating government pensions for workers, increosed job security for workers and enobling companies to grow bigger, all contributing to reducing poverty In addition, creating a centralised database for the poor makes being poor a lot less expensive.
Alreody, multiple countries are considering the possibility of adopting Blockchain technology to register and record lond title ownership. Countries such as Sv/eder, Hondu'os and Georgia ore testing Blockchoin technology, although Honduras attempts have recently :tal cd They are developing o land registry that is transparent, enables easy registrotion and respects land ownership. Registering property ownership, such os land titles, on the blockchain has multiple od'-ar'ages such as significantly reducing monual errors, while improving security processes for transferring documents, mortgoge or contracts.
Another area that con drosticolly improve the lives of the poor is Blockchain-enobled remittonces. Today, over $4l0 billion in remittances flow to developing countries, with an average cost of S u pci cert and up to 12 ocrcent in certain regions. Rcmit'onccs ore expensive, opaque and recurring tronsactions of necessity, with the costs borne predominantly by the poor. Blockchain con offer enormous improvements in cost-savings for the poor who send money to fomily in another country Not surprisingly, there are nii.i t pic stoitup: and orgonsaticrs, including the United Nations, who are developing blockchain based remittonce services. A blockchain based remittance service uses a crypto coin to tronsfer money instantly across the globe for a fraction of the costs and uses local agents to exchange the crypto coin into the local fiat money thot con be used by the receiver. Instead of doys and costing o fortune, it takes minutes and is nearly free.
Once multiple charities start collaborating, using the some shared database, it could moke the entire process of helping the poor a lot more efficient, effective and cheaper This would improve the lives of the poor os it gives them an economic profile thot could be used for various other octivities.
The future of poverty should be non-existing, meaning thot as per the UN goo Is, by 2030 poverty is gone in the world Big Dota Analytics, Artificial Intell igence ond Blockchain will enable us to achieve this audacious gool, but only if multiple organisations across the globe ore colloborating.
A few years back when Hadoop was on the rise, many jumped on the Hadoop bandwagon while at the same time having no idea what it was. That created quite a hype and many discovered that a new and disruptive technology is not that easy to implement, especially if you are working in an enterprise environment with IT departments that dont like changes and prefer to stick to their SQL databases, DWH's and cubes.
Larisa, great analysis of how enterprises can get their arms around Big Data and exploit its potential. I do think many Big Data practitioners will have more than one repository - for example, EDWs and Hadoop can serve different use cases, and relevant data cannot always be consolidated in bulk into one place. Enterprises should invest in software that can monitor data usage on EDWs or Hadoop, then move data subsets across platforms to use their infrastructures most efficiently.
  oreiifalkowitz  Couldn't agree more. Big data hides millions of small patterns, each one meaning something Small patterns, on the other hand, provide a specifc. .