Thanks to Dorcas Ansah, Chris Bonner, Mirai Chatterjee, Kathleen Diga, Sibailly Douhoure, Sapna Joshi, Firoza Mehrotra, Eduardo Mourinho, Federico Parra, Carmen Roca, Vilma Santana, Maitreyi Shankar, Poonsap Tulaphan, and Phumzile Xulu.
The study explored their involvement in health education, health campaigns, access to health services, and health insurance. It identified existing and planned modes of communication between organization leaders and members, and within regional and national alliances. It investigated in particular the use of mobile phones in health-related work and activities.
Information is presented here on the workers in the organization, or in the worker population served by the organization giving the interview.
Socio-economic status: All of the organizations purposely focus on poorer informal workers. Within this, globally, the waste pickers are the poorest group.
Geographical area: All except two work only in urban areas. Two MBOs  SEWA and HNT  also work in rural areas, as do some partners of the regional HNSA.
 Using organizational structures (where organizations were local and well organized) is a key method of getting messages to people. This was notably the case for AeT, HNT, KKPKP, SEWA, WIEGO in Lima and, to a lesser extent, in Accra.
 There was limited mention of additional means such as emails (which were not reliably answered, and were expensive), direct landline calls (which were expensive except in Ghana), newsletters, and mentions of posters, fliers and loudhailers when organizing campaigns.
 Language was mentioned as a barrier in different ways. Writing text in a local language can be time-consuming; the local language may need a different kind of script, for text messages. The regional organization, HNSA, working in South Asia, finds that language is the greatest barrier.
 KKPKP, the waste pickers union in India, runs insurance in collaboration with the Pune municipality. Around 4,000 workers belong to this.
WIEGO in Accra and in Lima have assisted informal workers to get access to Ghana and Peru's national health insurance schemes. In Accra, registration drives were held with the marginalized women headload porters (kayayei), with about 4,000 registering over a few days. A follow-up monitoring study was being done at the time of interview.
When a dai visits a woman who goes into labor, she phones a doctor or other health professional in SEWA's network of 'friendly providers', giving them warning that the woman is about to arrive at the health services, making an appointment for her, and asking that the health services watch out for her. Under the national government's 'safer motherhood' program, the  ais encourage the delivery of babies at the health services, and they get a small financial incentive for taking the women in labour to the health services.
A number of organizations (HNT, SEWA, WIEGO in Accra and Lima, KKPKP) played a bridging role between their members or affiliates and public health services, and this was a major plank in their health education work.
The health discipline of occupational health and safety (OHS) reaches only formal workers in formal workplaces, and a critical issue in promoting informal workers' health is to push that discipline  its concepts and curricula, and its regulatory and institutional practices  to be more inclusive of all workers and workplaces. The majority of those interviewed (six out of ten) had done or were doing work on occupational health and safety for informal workers (this would be higher than in a general sample of informal workers organizations, because of WIEGO's interest in the area).
 Workplace improvements: There have been direct interventions, such as HNT's active collaboration with hospitals to improve work-place conditions for HBWs (ventilation, lighting, and personal protective equipment, for example).
 Policy reform: WIEGO in Accra and Lima, UFBA, KKPKP, HNT and SEWA work actively to promote the expansion of OHS, as well as public health and environmental health, to include informal workers and workplaces.
Health education was seen by a number of organizations both as important in its own right, and also as an organizing tool. Three were directly involved.
India's SEWA has health education as a major plank of its overall commitment to better health for its members. They use pamphlets, posters, videos, diagnostic camps and campaigns to supplement the personal interaction with members and non-members. SEWA has experimented with a toll free phone line for reproductive health, and the development of a portal where younger people can use a touch screen to ask intimate questions about reproductive health across the life cycle. Both these interventions were very popular.
 AeT ran an eye care diagnostic camp, as well as a primary preventive health care camp, with tests for blood pressure, glucose, and HIV.
 WIEGO in Accra and in Lima did the registration drives for informal workers to join the national health insurance scheme (NHIS).
 KKPKP had a major primary health care and eye care screening in 2008 and 2009 of 4,000 people  then 60 percent of its members.
 SEWA had a campaign around the rational use of drugs  promoting awareness of the misuse, in the health system, of injections, drugs and drips.
 There may be a great lack of knowledge in the general population, including poorer and sometimes less educated workers, about simple health issues and diseases, as well as stigma towards particular health conditions (such as TB and HIV/AIDS).
 In Bogota, the low self esteem among some waste pickers is related to a poor quality of self care, a kind of 'immediatism', which in turn leads to avoidance of health education.
WIEGO as a global organization runs small and large surveys frequently. The Informal Economy Monitoring Study (IEMS) is a ten-city study (which includes Accra, Lima and Bogota) investigating the driving forces affecting the informal economy for homebased workers, street and market vendors, and waste pickers. The first round of qualitative and quantitative interviews and focus groups has been completed (see WIEGO website). There is rich information on the impact of local government investment in infrastructure such as sanitation, storage, water, and on the productivity and health of informal workers in all sectors studies.
Mobile phones were used by the organizations and their members for many work-related purposes: to inform about meetings, to find out about prices, to inform about opening hours and special bargains, to warn of impending evictions, among others. In Bihar state in India, mothers had been taught by their children how to use the mobile phone so that they could be in touch with their absent husbands who were migrant laborers.
Filming: Leaders of ARB waste pickers in Bogota have repeatedly used mobile phones to film the statements of government on issues of interest to waste pickers, and these clips are shown in meetings and assemblies. They also record the abuses by police. The mobile phone is thus useful for real time reporting and advocacy.
Some areas for further exploration and development were given in Section 7. We conclude with three final points that stand out as fundamentally important.
Second, there is a need for further exploration of different needs in different occupational sectors (as was done in the Rockefeller Foundation's background presentation for this work). Some pointers to this appeared in some of the interviews: the relative isolation of both domestic workers and home-based workers; the respiratory problems of specific occupations such as newspaper vending; the huge loads carried by market porters; and the fires that so frequently occur in built markets.