Most Kenyans do not have access to adequate basic healthcare for themselves and their families. They either rely on public services, which are often overstretched, or on private healthcare that they need to pay out of their pockets and which may not be affordable. Health insurance is generally out of their reach. Combined, these factors lead to very poor health outcomes, such as the highest maternal and child mortality in East Africa.
M-Tiba is powered by CarePay, a company operating a revolutionary mobile transaction and administration platform entirely dedicated to healthcare. The platform allows transactions between M-Tiba users and the designated healthcare providers to take place, and provides transparency and accountability of healthcare services.
Safaricom is Kenya's largest mobile network provider with over 25.1 million subscribers, providing over 200,000 touch points for its customers. Its M-PESA mobile payment service is the world's largest with over 22 million subscribers. The objective of 'healthcare inclusion' is in line with Safaricom's mission of 'Transforming lives'.
M-Tiba was introduced to 5,000 mothers with children under 5 years of age (around 10,000 beneficiaries in total) living in informal settlements in Nairobi. Potential users were identified through SMS blasts sent out by Safaricom, and by field agents working with community health workers. Each eligible registered user received KES 1,000 (~US$ 10) in their wallet. The money earmarked for treatment for children up to the age of 5 years only. A total of 44 selected healthcare providers, screened for quality of care, participated.
sooner. 77% of the women indicated that they were willing to save for health in their wallet. This trial shows at relatively small scale what kind of impact M-Tiba can have for these mothers and their children on accessibility and affordability of healthcare. For each health wallet transaction, valuable data was gathered on the services provided and the financial side of each transaction.