This study investigates the role of the ICT ecosystem within the informal business sectors of rural and urban Jamaica, relying on an exploratory collective case study methodology to highlight the differences in how the use of mobile phones have facilitated and enhanced entrepreneurial opportunities for business operators existing in the informal economy. The findings of the study confirm existing research about the socio-economic benefits of ICTs but also highlight specific characteristics related to informal ICT ecosystems. For example, we found that there was a close-knit set of entrepreneurs who were motivated by competition between one another but who would still engage in mutual learning and information sharing. These ecosystems also entail a system of social hierarchy among the actors, although there is potential for mobility. Finally, we note that our findings suggest a potential reconsideration of definitions of the informal sector that emphasize low-skilled labour.
First we note that research on the new ICT ecosystem tends to focus on the macroeconomic outcomes. These works examine the role of the internet as an innovative platform in developed and transitioning economies (Antonelli & Barnes, 2007; Arlandis & Ciriani, 2010; Bauer, 2012; Fransman, 2007, 2010, InfoDev, 2007; World Bank, 2012a); notwithstanding the fact that the internet is not widely accessible in developing countries (Larsen, 2013; UN News Center, 2012).
Given the ubiquity of ICTs, and more specifically the mobile phone, in contemporary economies as well as the particularly important role of the informal sector in developing countries, we note the important intersection between ICT ecosystems and the informal sector. It is this intersection that we focus on in this paper.
This paper attempts to extend the literature on the socio-economic impact of mobile phones by examining the informal business sector using the emerging framework of ICT ecosystems. More specifically, the authors seek to examine the influence of informal ICT ecosystems at the sub-national level. In so doing, we seek to expand the existing discourse on ICT ecosystems by focusing on; (1) the growing informal sector that is prominent in the developing-country context, and (2) the community level where informal business networks are often more relevant than at the national level.
This paper is divided in three sections; in the first section we provide an overview of the formal ICT ecosystem, its emergence and key characteristics focusing specifically on Fransman's (2010) work. The next section examines the importance of the informal business sector and its contribution to the economies of developing countries. We then aim to show how the emergence of an ICT ecosystem has influenced the informal trade within the rural and urban areas and describe more specifically how the mobile phone has facilitated this trade, by providing a conceptual overview of the interaction between these stakeholders.
progressive transformation development. This discourse highlight that innovation established in developed countries can be transferred as a requirement for improving efficiency and livelihood outcomes in developing context. Though this discourse acknowledges the possibility of socio-economic development through technology transfer, it acknowledges that one size does not fit all, moreover developing countries do not have the technical capacity to absorb these innovations in its natural form, consequently institutions must adopt/must go through a adaption (Avgerou, 2010; Braa et al., 2004). This argument is of significance since this paper attempts to transfer the ICT ecosystem, indigenous to developed economies to a developing context.
tCT difea avt fiecessuriiy nsHli in dfvefupmani for aU: The trumfer and dijfusioti of ICT leads to anevert devetopmeni.
ICT does nvt neeessarily resuit in devetopmeni for aii: It is subject to tite potoer dynatftits of IS iiinoyatioii action.
According to Fransman (2010), the newly emerged ICT ecosystem has had implications on the economic sector, as it has altered the existing status quo and created new industries. He highlights how the emergence of ICTs served as an innovative platform which facilitated the amalgamation of the telecommunication and economic sectors (2011, p. 3). The ICT ecosystems emerged through technological innovation. This innovation challenged the capitalist status quo which was dismantled and reconstructed. In order to survive the players had to adapt. Fransman used Darwin's work to highlight that adaptation is key to survival. That is, within an ecology, changes in the environment are inevitable and to survive species have to conform to these changes to remain relevant. Similarly, adaptation and survival of firms and businesses is reflected in the economic sector whenever there are large-scale shifts in the ICT sector. The internet represents one such game changer.
Central to all ICT ecosystems is an innovative platform, which is regarded by Fransman as "a building block, which can be a product, a technology, or a service that acts as a foundation upon which other firms can develop complementary products, technologies and services" (Fransman, 2010, p. xviii). As such, in the case of developing countries, the mobile phone serves as an innovative platform in creating a significant impact within the informal sector. This is in contrast to developed countries where the internet is utilized as an innovative platform in creating a new ICT ecosystem. Invariably, Fransman and other scholars focused extensively on the new ICT ecosystem in the formal economy in developed countries, with the internet as the ICT under study. Understandably so, this was not applied to developing countries as the internet is not widely distributed. Furthermore, the internet does not significantly affect the informal sector in developing countries as it does the formal economy in developed countries. Nevertheless, while developing countries have limited internet coverage, they and by extension their informal economy has experienced an evolution of the ICT industry through a different type of ICT: the mobile phone, to which Fransman's framework of the ICT ecosystem is convincingly just as applicable.
With the continued expansion of the international telecoms sector, in particular that of mobile phones, there has been significant growth in the occupational opportunities for providers and end users of this technology (Andjelkovic & Imaizumi, 2012; Quadir, 2012). According to Andjelkovic and Imaizumi (2012); Duncombe (2007) it has become evident that mobile phones have opened new avenues for its users to earn significant sums of money, buttressing their ability to sustain their livelihoods, as well as, shaping chances for them to become entrepreneurs. The authors explained further that there are no significant skill restrictions on who can benefit from the occupational opportunities available in this sector, as the entire gamut of employable people - top level management to low skilled individuals - are included (Andjelkovic & Imaizumi, 2012).
Given the importance of the informal sector among the rural and urban entrepreneurs, the structure of the mobile phone ecosystem differs from the formal sector, as trade tends to be unregulated. This unregulated trade, gives rise to "the informal economy which refers to activities and income that are partially or fully outside of governments' regulation, taxation, and observation," where, " the main attraction of the undeclared economy is financial" (World Bank, 2004 p.1). We should note that there are numerous ways in which this phenomenon is construed (Mead & Morrisson, 1996). This includes the use of political criteria (e.g., whether or not the government regulates the sector, its inclusion in national statistics, or whether it is considered illegal), economic criteria (actors evade taxes, size of the sector, etc.), and social criteria (used as a means of survival, or is based on social networks) (Gerxhani, 2004).
"The informal economy represented a large and growing share of the overall economy, measuring in the vicinity of 40 per cent of total economic activity as currently measured. This growing sector represents a diverse group of enterprises and workers, ranging from local peddlers to sophisticated small entrepreneurs" (Torero et al., 2011, p. 5).
observers such as Blavy (2007) and Anderson (1987) and others note that the informal sector is often characterized by low-skilled work in Jamaica, a point which this paper will challenge using current evidence.
Perhaps what can be described as the informal ICT ecosystem both in the urban and rural areas owes its existence to two significant epochs in the mobile phone evolution in Jamaica. In the first stage, the liberalization of Jamaica's telecom industry paved the way for new mobile phone companies to enter the market. In April 2001, Irish Mobile Telephone Company Digicel was granted its telecommunications licensed to operate in Jamaica. Initially, the company projected that it would reach 100,000 customers after its first year; instead the company reached its mark within the first 100 days and established itself as the major mobile network provider. At present, the company controls about 75 per cent of the cellular phone market in the country (Golding et al., 2011). Its main competitor is the UK based enterprise Cable & Wireless which operates under the brand LIME. Cable & Wireless was formerly the largest telecommunications operator in the Jamaican market.
Motorola, Panasonic etc.). These handsets manufacturers relied on Jamaica's local network providers (Digicel and LIME) in layer two for its operability, the convergence between layer one and two created a platform for intermediaries. Within the ICT ecosystem, phone card vendors are one of the earliest known intermediaries in layer three. These vendors thrived as a result of the inability of network and handset providers to meet the demand of users, who depended on a ubiquitous supply of locations and avenues to purchase airtime (credit). Network providers had to rely on the phone card vendors to retail credit in the form of scratch cards to customers in layer four.
Adjacent to the formal trade which includes phone stores, distributors of mobile phones and phone warranty repairs, is the informal trade in the urban area that includes a host/network of players in the form of importers, repair personal, phone parts traders, internet service providers and end users. Collectively, the interaction and interdependence between each player creates an ICT ecology. These players arrived primarily in the second stage of the mobile phone evolution.
relies primarily on the ICT ecosystem for their operability. A comparative analysis of these two cases was conducted to identify how each set of informal entrepreneur functions uniquely within the ICT ecosystem.
Upon selection of informal entrepreneurs in both cases, the aim was to gain a firsthand understanding of their network's operability (centring on the ICT ecosystem) by way of face-to-face interviews. This method was adjusted from time to time to suite the circumstances and preference of the interviewee. In some instances the interview schedule and tape recorder were abandoned and instead a general conversation centred on the main interests of the study was conducted. This allowed participants to relax and develop a level of trust with the interviewer so that they were more comfortable with expressing themselves. In instances where respondents refused to be recorded we resorted to conversation and overt observation of the entrepreneur's activities.
Overall, we interviewed six informal entrepreneurs from the post ICT ecosystem network and one from the pre-ICT ecosystem network. These were all conducted in 2013 within a 2-month span throughout Jamaica. Aliases are used in all cases throughout the paper.
Overall, the authors attained quality assurance in data collection and analysis, as we adhered to Klein and Myers' (1999) seven principles of interpretative field research; the Hermeneutic Circle, Contextualisation, Interaction between Researchers and Subjects, Abstraction and Generalisation, Principle of Dialogue and Reasoning, Multiple Interpretations as well as Principle of Suspicion. For instance, we treated each interview as parts which were combined to achieve a full understanding of the phenomenon under study. These meanings were also analyse within two different contexts; one, Jamaica as a developing country; two, rural vs. urban setting. The researchers also took into account the historical context, namely the modus operandi of entrepreneurs in the pre and post emergence of the mobile phone. Interaction between researchers and subjects assisted in improving researchers understanding of how the mobile ecosystem influenced their trade.
This case is located in one of Jamaica's many remote rural communities in the south western part of the country. The community has a population of approximately 20,000 residents. The majority of adults earn their livelihood through farming, shop keeping, taxi operating and fish mongering. In the case of Ms. Blossom, she is a well-known individual in the community and makes her living by peddling/vending food items of fish and bammy1 which she has done for over 40 years.
The mobile phone, the network service provider as well as the phone card retailer are important actors in the eco-system as they maintain a symbiotic relationship with all other organisms, while facilitating interdependent relationships among the others. The mobile device is owned by each organism and is used as a means of communication whereas the phone service provider facilitates interaction through its networks across the island.
The second ICT ecosystem examined is located in the urban capital city of Kingston. We focus particularly on persons involved in the ICT trade. This informal system involves individuals who import (phones and parts), sell, repair, unlock, and trade used phone parts locally. These urban entrepreneurs, emerged as a result of the advent of mobile phones, unlike rural entrepreneurs or pre-existing businesses in Fransman model, they did not go through evolution nor were they subjected to adaption for their own survival, instead these entrepreneurs like those in the original model (Facebook, Twitter, Amazon) emerged primarily through an interdependent relationship between layer 1 and layer 2. Based on the hierarchy of this ecosystem, at layer 1 are formal handset manufacturers (Samsung, Nokia, Apple etc.), these handsets are made functional based on service provided by local network element providers (Digicel and Lime) in layer 2. However, the handsets provided in layer 1 are sourced by customers or the entrepreneurs from overseas. This runs parallel to the traditional, locally licenced phone distributors whose phones are locked to their network. These urban entrepreneurs who source, sell, repair and unlock cellular phones in layers 1 and 3 are connected to buyers who are dependent on their trade, as well as to local and overseas suppliers who, in turn, depend on these entrepreneurs for purchases, thus forming several symbiotic relationships.
additional intermediaries such as phone repair personnel, which was intensified with the emergence of more sophisticated handsets like the Sony Erickson P800 (one of the earliest to emerge) followed by the Motorola Razor. This influx gained momentum with the introduction of the Blackberry smart phone and more recently the Apple iPhone, Samsung Galaxy and HTC phones which have created a completely new market for a variety of entrepreneurs.
The boom in the variety of smart phones has spawned an increase in indirect jobs, that is, jobs which fall outside the realm of the formal employment sector in the mobile phone industries. Persons have entered the industry by buying and selling smart phones below the market price of the two established phone companies in Jamaica. These phones are sourced on the Internet from overseas suppliers and are purchased and imported to Jamaica. These informal entrepreneurs are dependent on their overseas suppliers for new stock, while the local clientele is in turn are dependent on the local entrepreneur for the supply of the smart phone for which there is a high demand (see figure 6). However, often times these mobile phones are locked to an overseas network and therefore require a network code to be unlocked to function on the networks of local providers. This service is not provided by any of the two local phone companies, as it is in their financial interest to ensure that the phone they distribute is locked to their network to prevent customers from switching to their rival. End users nevertheless wish to have the liberty of purchasing an unlocked smart phone to work on any network internationally. Within the urban area, the demand for unlocked smart phones is met by informal entrepreneurs. To unlock the phone, these informal entrepreneurs purchase a phone code online from an overseas website and this is then programmed into the locked phone; where this does not work, the phone is "flashed," that is, hooked up to a computer and the software erased and reinstalled with the unlocked settings.
phones for one reason or another do malfunction, thus creating demand for more technical competencies such as replacement of batteries, keypads, screens, data boards, software reinstalment and update. These technicians also attract illegitimate customers, who steal phones and require them to wipe the information, thus underlining the dark side of this informal sector. Collectively, the interaction between local informal importers/retailers of mobile phones along with the overseas suppliers, website hosts, phone code distributors, local internet service providers as well as reliance on the PC to conduct specific aspects of the trade and purchases of the imported smart phones, give rise to the urban informal ICT ecosystem. This is undoubtedly so as the emergence of the smart phone has created a new market/open space in which the interacting players converge to establish symbiotic relationships as well as interdependence among each other.
Though Fransman's framework was designed to examine large scale firms, this framework nevertheless becomes applicable here, as when transferred to the local setting, like large scale firms, small scale informal business experienced a similar evolution however using a different technology, the mobile phone, as opposed to the internet. Moreover, when compared, both systems revealed movements of members across multiple layers, though they have different members. In this study, and in keeping with the principle of innovation by transfer and diffusion; Fransman's ecosystem model is used to demonstrate ICT models established in developed countries can be transferred to a developing context and socioeconomic achievements be achieved. Nonetheless, the prevailing infrastructure of the two cases used to reflect the informal sector, highlights that the informal sector is not equipped to facilitate Fransman's model in its natural form, instead adaptation is required (Avgerou, 2010; Braa et al., 2004).
Adaptation is key to the survival of participants in both instances. For the rural case study adaptation during the emerging stage of the mobile phone was central to Blossom's business' survival. Of limited educational background, the sole trader indicated that initially she did not know how to use and was not interested in owning or using a mobile phone.
knowledge base. Without the constant improvement in knowledge the survival of their livelihood becomes threatened with stagnation or extinction. In the end only entrepreneurs with advanced skills have a high possibility of prolonged survival.
The informal ICT ecosystem has created a reversal in the direction of Ms. Blossom's interaction with her customers. For instance, in the past Ms. Blossom would reach out to her customers by travelling from house to house in the community on her donkey in 'search' of customers, use her voice to announce (call out) her presence as she passes through the community and, on a productive day would be able to complete a day's sale without substantial spoilage. Though the symbiotic relationship between her and her customers remains, the direction of the relationship has reversed. Ms B now stays at home exclusively, and with the use of the mobile phone, customers can reach her directly. She now takes orders by phone and prepares her fish and bammy according to order; this has completely eliminated spoilage and significantly reduced financial loss with substantial increase in profits.
There are also the opportunity costs associated with not having a phone. For instance, it is not feasible to buy a new phone each time the current one may malfunction so when a person does not have their phone for a day, they lose production time, profits, and the ability to communicate. The ability to purchase an unlocked phone gives end users the power of independence and the ability to increase their purchasing power. End users have the option to purchase a SIM card from their preferred network without having to worry about the operability of their handset. They in turn benefit in the long run as they switch between networks depending on who is offering lower rates.
This is not the case in the rural ICT eco-system. However we argue that while Ms. Blossom was able to benefit in terms of efficiency, increase in profits and a reduction in spoilage of products; the rural ICT network has experienced very little else. Within this business network, with the exception of the airtime vendor, limited opportunity for employment exist beyond that of the sole trader who provides fish and bammy. Additionally those involved in the trade are not challenged to improve their skills beyond the ability to make and receive phone calls.
The role of the ICT ecosystem when applied to a developing context has become indispensable to the interoperability of pre-existing businesses in trade through facilitating interdependency among critical agents within an informal business network. Additionally, emergent informal agents have created a niche within the ICT ecosystem through the provision of critical services to meet the demand of end users who are dependent on their services. These micro entrepreneurs are predominantly poor with very low levels of education but significant IT skills. They are however able to empower themselves through the use of their phones within their network to command greater control over space and time and harness the power to increase profits and gain employment all within a local space.
The mobile ICT ecosystem is open as well as inclusive in so far as stakeholders are willing to adapt as it is only the fittest of the fittest survive, therefore the possibility of isolating those who are not able to use the mobile technology platform remains. Development agencies should therefore reassess how the use of simple and complex technologies can help them achieve their mandate. For example, in cases where there is a poverty reduction mandate, it could be prudent to educate persons on the use of ICT in their small businesses. This would however be done after careful analysis of the regional situation as it would only have an impact in areas that have telecommunication services already set up, or are about to benefit from such services. Another point of action could also be the empowering of persons through skills training on how to repair these devices, which have become so pervasive in daily use. The ability to earn an income has been clearly shown and NGO's that engage in skills training could consider packaging a programme to train persons in this skill.
Aker, J.C.M.I.M. (2010). Mobile Phones and Economic Development in Africa. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 24, 3, 207-232.
Bauer, J.M. (2012). Innovation in ICT Ecosystems. Paper presented at the 23rd European Regional International Telecommunication Society Conference, Vienna,.
Blades, D., Ferreira, F., & Lugo, M. A. (2011). The Informal Economy In Developing Countries: An Introduction. Review of Income and Wealth, 57, s1, 1.
Duncombe, R. (2007). Using the Livelihoods Framework to Analyze ICT Applications for Poverty Reduction through Microenterprise. Information Technologies and International Development, 3, 3, 81-100.
Gerxhani, K. (2004). The Informal Sector in Developed and Less Developed Countries: A Literature Survey. Public Choice, 120, 3-4, 267-300.
Heeks, R. (2002). Information Systems and Developing Countries: Failure, Success, and Local Improvisations. The Information Society, 18, 2, 101-112.
Waller, L. G (2006). ICTs for Whose Development? A critical analysis of the discourses surrounding an ICTfor Development Initiative for a group of microenterprise entrepreneurs operating in the Jamaican tourism industry: Towards the development of methodologies and analytical tools for understanding and explaining the ICTfor Development Phenomenon Doctor of Philosophy The University of Waikato.
World Bank. (2012b). Maximizing Mobile: 2012 Information and Communications for Development, http://dx.doi.org/10.1596/978-0-8213-8991-1 Yin, R.K. (2003). Case Study Research: Design and Methods. Thousand Oaks, California: Sage Publications.