This case study explores the factors both supporting and impeding the widespread adoption of Person-to-Government (P2G) and Business-to-Government (B2G) payments in Tanzania, focusing on the period from 2012 to 2016. It also extrapolates from these findings to show that digitization of payments could increase Tanzania's annual tax revenue by at least $477million per annum1, which would help push up the country's tax/GDP ratio, currently at 12%. The policy initiatives taken by Tanzania's Central Bank and actions taken by Tanzanian government agencies and the private sector have provided valuable lessons from which policymakers and businesses in other countries can learn as they go about digitizing P2G and B2G payments.
This executive summary provides highlights of both the direct benefits of digitization and the lessons from Tanzania.
In Tanzania, separate government agencies have developed digital payment acceptance solutions in isolation. These solutions reflect their specific needs, often partly driven by the payment capabilities of private sector entities. While these developments are encouraging, the lack of interconnectivity between a range of closed loop and open loop payment instruments raises questions about the implications for formalization and financial inclusion. An overarching strategy for P2G and B2G payments is needed to support interconnectedness between payment instruments and provide an opportunity for the private sector, particularly industry telecom and banking associations, and government entities, to work together on collaborative solutions.
In Tanzania's tourism sector - which produces around 13%5 of Tanzania's GDP - government entities reported large increases in revenues which they attribute to reduced leakage when moving from cash-based systems to digital systems for payments like conservation park entrance fees paid by tourists and tourism operators. Tanzania's payment digitization efforts in the tourism sector serve as a valuable example to countries where tourism is a major revenue stream and a major source of foreign exchange.
New payment instruments, like the dosed loop prepaid card for hospital payments introduced by the Cooperative Rural Development Bank (CRDB), are not only bringing in efficiency gains but also introducing people to the concept of digital payments. While closed loop payments serve a limited purpose, they act as an on-ramp to financial inclusion by increasing customer adoption of and trust in digital payments.
A technology backend - that is, technology and functions that process P2G and B2G payments - plays a crucial role in the efficiency and accuracy of digital payments, in turn impacting on public trust in digital payments. A critical first step is ensuring backend technology is capable not only of accepting payments from multiple payment instruments, but also of realtime validation, acknowledgment and periodic reconciliation. Attributes like instant acknowledgment of payments go a long way in building confidence among new users of digital payments instruments.
Interviews of businesses and individuals conducted for this study highlighted a substantial lack of awareness around the various payment digitization efforts undertaken by the government. For example, most micro and small businesses interviewed for this case study did not know that they could pay their presumptive income taxes electronically if they had a bank account. Furthermore, not a single respondent interviewed stated that their bank had encouraged them to use a digital means to pay the revenue authority.
To pay income taxes in Tanzania, most micro, small, and medium businesses are required to go through an assessment process. Businesses submit their sales records or receipt books to the closest TRA office for assessment, and receive a paper confirmation of the amount of their tax liability. Since most payers are required to travel to the TRA offices anyway, the convenience that emerges from the ability to pay remotely through digital payments is marginal. Since most banks already have branches in or around TRA offices, customers directly pay at the bank in cash or physically sign and authorize a wire transfer to the TRA.
It is important to note this study is not a country diagnostic study which sets out in detail all quantitative elements of various payment flows, achievements, and challenges of P2G and B2G payments in Tanzania. Instead it aims to provide the reader with a broader overview of the state of digital P2G and B2G payments in Tanzania, the key players, successful P2G and B2G payment use cases, and the key lessons from Tanzania for policymakers and other stakeholders who are looking to accelerate the transition from cash to digital economies.
In order to provide the reader with the latest movements on digital payments in Tanzania, where needed this study makes use of demand side data such as, number of digital accounts (mobile money and banks), digital payment use cases, and user requirement for digital payment account registration and usage, from the recently concluded Financial Inclusion Insights study of December 2015.
2. Can P2G be the driver of financial inclusion? If so, what payment types or solutions can be made available to first-time users, accelerating their integration into the format economy.
A digital PEG or BEG payment is defined as a transfer of funds, directly from the account of an individual or business, to the account of the government using a digital channel, instrument or store of value.
PEG and BEG payments can be defined as collecting income, sales and value-added payments, social security and pension contributions, automotive costs (including tolls, and fines), and company registration fees.
The matrix below lists and further elaborates on the definition of P2G and B2G payments across four dimensions - the payer, the payee, payment instruments, and payment channels.
It does not restrict the definition of payer to citizens of the country or a business that is registered only within the country of scope.
A payment instrument is the physical or electronic tool that enables a payer to make or initiate a payment.
 Digital stores of value are non-cash assets that hold the value of funds that a payer uses and transfer funds. E.g., prepaid cards, bank and mobile wallet accounts and any other type of digital wallet.
Depending on the country context, taking a more inclusive approach to the types of payers considered can increase the relevance of the study.
How the government structures services and revenue collection plays an important part in the selection of the universe of payees.
An individual who owns a bank account could pay for her taxes using internet banking, which is an EFT.
The matrix below lists and further elaborates on the definition of P2G and B2G payments across four dimensions - the payer, the payee, payment instruments, and payment channels.
Payment method or channel and purpose are jointly defined as "use case" in this case study. The range of P2G and B2G payment use cases being considered fall into the following three categories.
GOVERNMENT SERVICES Payments made in exchange for services provided by government. Example: utilities like power and water, licenses for businesses' registrations, passport, visa fees, vehicle registration, etc.
As far as possible, the examples of digital P2G and B2G payments in Tanzania captured in this study attempt to map the payment value chain both from the payee and payer perspectives.
IV. The payee's backend system accepts a range of digital payment instruments, thus giving the payer the choice to use their preferred payment instrument.
This chapter examines the key constituents of a wett-functioning, country-level inclusive digital payment ecosystem. These include a supportive regulatory environment, enabling market conditions, interoperability of payment instruments, dynamic service providers, and compelling payment use cases. Jointly these factors act as a barometer of a country's readiness to enable, accept, and move quickly toward digital P2G and B2G payments.
II. A stocktaking phase that ended in 199823 aimed at aggregating information on the country's payment infrastructure (the state of automation, existing payment instruments, inter-bank clearance, and settlement systems) and other major factors (social, political, and economic) influencing the country's payment systems.
1993 Liberaiization of financial industry For nearly 30 years post-independence Tanzania was a centrally planned economy. It had only one state-owned bank dominating the financial sector. In 1993 the industry liberalized, permitting other entrants.
2002 BoT's Electronic Clearing House (BoTECH) Facilitated electronic inter-bank settlements other than paper-based instruments. Reduced clearing time for debit instruments from five to two days locally, and from 30 to seven days inter-regionally.
2006 Bank of Tanzania Act, 2006 (amended) Empowered the Bank of Tanzania to administer and regulate non-bank entities in relation to payment services.
2008 Launch of Mobile Money Vodacom and Zantel launch M-Pesa and Z-Pesa (relaunched as Ezy Pesa in 2012) in 2008. The Bank of Tanzania saw the potential of alternative payment instruments improving access to, and adoption of, formal financial services, eventually increasing financial inclusion.
2012 Mobile Financial Services (MFS) Regulation (draft) Final draft on MFS regulations submitted to the Ministry of Finance.
2015 National Payments Systems (NPS) Act 201526 including: Electronic Money Regulations, 2015 Payments Systems Licensing and Approval Regulations, 201527 The NPS Act introduced check truncation as a payment instrument. The Electronic Money Regulations formulated under this act defines the licensing regime for payment systems and e-money issuers. It allows for future MNOs and other third parties to obtain e-money licenses by establishing separate legal entities.
2015 Cybercrime Act, 201529 Criminalizes ICT related offences (e.g., illegal access and identity theft), and provides for investigation and use of electronic evidence.
2016 National ATM Switch (pipeline)30 The national ATM switch that would allow customers of all banks to access cash across all ATM machines in the country, is an effort undertaken by the Tanzanian Bankers Association. The BoT is facilitating and overseeing these developments that will eventually lead to nation-wide ATM interoperability.
The year 2015 brought substantial achievements for regulators, financial service providers, financial intermediaries, and customers in Tanzania. Three key laws: The National Payments Systems Act, The Electronic Transactions Act, and the Cybercrime Act were passed by the national parliament.
 Provides for licensing and use of electronic money (e-money), interoperability, clearing, and netting standards31, thus increasing the legal certainty of mobile money operations. This might also influence the volume of payments flowing through EFTs32. The Bank of Tanzania now has the regulatory power to impose penalties for violations rather than merely revoking the Letters of No Objection provided to Mobile Network Operators (MNOs), the only enforcement recourse available until the law was passed in 2015.
 The previous inter-bank clearing and settlement process was complex and manual. It could take three days for clearing within cities and up to 28 days for remote clearing. Check Truncation System (CTS) now enables commercial banks in Tanzania to clear checks within a matter of hours. In order to ensure seamless inter-bank settling of electronic checks, the Bank of Tanzania also established the Tanzania Automated Clearing House (TACH) in 2015 that accepts two check settlement windows in a single day.
When comparing the popularity of payment instruments, it is important to note that large-value payers (i.e., those making payments greater than TZS 10 million or US$ 4,568) prefer Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) payments, a common practice in many countries particularly for large government-to-government (G2G), government-to-business (G2B), and business-to-business (B2B) payments. The rising value of these payments is illustrated in the below graph. In Tanzania RTGS payments today are cleared within two hours and the Bank of Tanzania has set a very low price ceiling on RTGS payments at a flat price of TZS 10,000 (US$ 4.75) per payment, irrespective of payment transfer size. This has actively incentivized digital high-value payments.
1. Admissibility of electronic receipts and acknowledgments as legal evidence, expected to encourage more payers to adopt electronic payment instruments and channels for both small and high value payments.
3. Recognition of e-government services, specifically addressing digital payments for government services including the use of electronic records, electronic transactions, and receipts.
 2. Enabling Market Conditions In East Africa, Tanzania's financial services market stands out. Both the traditional banking and alternative payments (e.g., mobile money) markets feature healthy competition, diversity in product offerings, a certain level of inter-connectedness facilitated by financial intermediaries, and a willingness to innovate. Many of these factors are not present in other markets in the region. This section explores Tanzania's market readiness, supply side, and demand side characteristics of traditional and non-traditional payment systems, and highlights a new set of emerging financial stakeholders. I. Market Readiness: key elements essential for digital account ownership Data from the recently concluded Financial Inclusion Insights (FII) Survey of 201533 indicates that a majority of adult Tanzanians have the basic requirements needed to hold a digital financial account. The graph below sets out the relative progress made on six of these basic requirements from 2013 to 2015.
According to the Bank of Tanzania's annual Banking Supervision Report, the banking sector in 2014 consisted of 53 banking institutions, 34 of which were commercial banks34. Four commercial banks held nearly 50% of the total asset base of the banking sector, namely CRDB Bank PLC, NMB Bank PLC, National Bank of Commerce (NBC), and Standard Chartered Bank.
Formal banking penetration is still low. Only 9% of the adult population holds a bank account and that number drops to 5% of the adult population in relation to active bank account holders (FII 2015). This is not surprising given that a majority of Tanzania's 702 bank branches are located in the major cities of Arusha, Dar es Salaam, Mbeya, Moshi, and Mwanza, while 70% of the population lives in rural areas of the country (World Bank, 2014).
The popularity of ATMs, a majority of which are located in urban centers, is also reflected in the payment value data across these banking channels, in recent years.
In Tanzania, Selcom and Maxcom also have a dense footprint of POS merchants who accept Over-the-Counter (OTC) cash payments, a common practice for larger-value payments since customers often prefer a printed receipt. Collectively these two payment aggregators facilitate a majority of the utility payments in the country - via mobile money, mobile banking, and OTC payments.
By 2015 nearly 61% of the adult population owned a formal account. Much of this growth has been driven by e-money providers.
 The first shift happens when bulk payers in an economy like the government, large employers, or development aid distributors decide to pay electronically, also known as "few to many" payments.
 The third shift involves the transition to a cash-lite economy, with "many to many" payments such as individual retail transactions, and ordinarily comes after "many-to-few" payment processes are well established.
Payment digitization can deliver higher revenue cottection for governments, increased compliance, efficiency gains, higher accountability and transparency, and risk management. For individuals and businesses, the convenience, time savings, and reliability that come with digital payments increase the probability of these constituents continuing to remain active digital users. Thus, connecting them to the formal financial system, which in turn drives new economic opportunities and supports economic growth.
This chapter explores five diverse P2G and B2G examples in Tanzania across the three categories of: mandatory payments, government services, and payments for government benefits. The payment types included are: annual motor vehicle license payments, customs duty payments, national park entrance fees, utilities, and hospital payments.
Customers can also pay at commercial banks or Maxmalipo (merchant service points run by the payment aggregator Maxcom) outlets.
This payment use case also provides an example of how financial intermediaries are contributing to P2G and B2G payment digitization. Maxcom facilitated all mobile money (Vodacom, Tigo, Airtel) integrations with the TRA system. Apart from payment facilitation, they also ensured that the TRA backend system received notifications on successful payments, thus enabling the reconciliation and acknowledgment process to be digitized. Today, after a successful payment completion, customers can walk into any TRA office across the country with the acknowledgment number and receive a print-out of the annual motor vehicle license stickers for their vehicles.
The system, which also integrates with the port authority, allows licensed clearing and forwarding customs agents62 to submit all export and import related documentation online, whereas previously agents were required to move from office to office to clear paperwork.
The TANCIS capabilities, including the option of accepting advance payments for cargo clearance, contributed in drastically bringing down cargo wait times, directly reducing costs to businesses and increasing government revenues. Today, the time between document submission and issuance of customs release orders has been reduced from four days to one day. The TANCIS system was designed to reduce export clearance from five days to one, and import clearance from nine days to five. A year after its introduction, in August 2015, TANCIS reported that reduction in import clearance times had surpassed expectations - reducing the nine day clearing time to an average of less than one day.
The Tanzania Revenue Authority put in place effective steps to on-board, engage, and support clearing and forwarding customs agents. Supported by the Investment Climate Facility (ICF) for awareness generation activities, the Tanzania Revenue Authority invited agents for an interactive workshop to provide training on how to use the TANCIS system, and arranged for frequent visits to agent offices for six months to ensure a smooth transition.
This payment gateway is being facilitated by BCX, the payment aggregator that runs the country's domestic bank switch - Umoja. There is no cost to payers to use this system. The Tanzania Ports Authority bears the cost of the system - sharing a percentage of revenues that is split among BCX and other financial providers.
In 2011, the Ngorongoro Conservation Area Authority (NCAA) - which manages a major tourist attraction including a volcanic crater - decided to go cashless with smart cards (prepaid store value cards) and VISA cards. The NCAA banned cash payments for park entrance fees.66 Two years after going cashless, NCAA reported a 40% jump in revenue for the same volume of tourists. Park gate fee revenues went from averaging around TZS 37 billion (US$ 16 million) to TZS 52 billion (US$ 23 million)67. The NCAA attributed the improvement to the effectiveness of the cashless system in reducing losses occurring due to leakage from the previous cash-based system.
All national parks in Tanzania are now outfitted with a digital POS (mostly provided by the Cooperative Rural Development Bank, CRDB, and Exim Bank), and can accept VISA, MasterCard and the CRDB bank powered TANAPA prepaid cards. The prepaid cards are available at all CRDB and Exim bank branches.
Some tour operators are now lobbying the NCAA (which does not fall under TANAPA supervision) to update its electronic payment gateway system to a system similar to the CRDB system. The NCAA system is considered by some tour operators as dated because it still requires tour operators to directly deposit cash at banks and provide bank slips in order to obtain prepaid smart cards. Also, the POS machines only accept VISA cards -requiring tourists using MasterCard to undergo the same bank-slip based top-up procedure to obtain a smart card.
In a strategic effort to increase its competitive edge and boost revenues, the Cooperative Rural Development Bank (CRDB) approached the Tanzania National Park Authority (TANAPA) in 2011 with a proposal to digitize park entrance fees. CRDB developed the park fee payment solution, and integrated it across VISA and MasterCard payment networks. For tourists not on these global networks, CRDB developed the closed-loop TANAPA card that could be topped up by cash.
I. Capital investment in Point-of-Sale (POS) terminals and satellite dishes with two-way communication in 16 national parks.
III. Education of tour operators through quarterly seminars, including instruction on how the cards worked, top-up methods, problemsolving, and dispute resolution.
CRDB on-boarded national parks onto its system in a phased manner, at the rate of four parks per year over four years.
According to qualitative interviews with CRDB in early 2016, in addition to customers, around 400 tour operators in the country use TANAPA prepaid cards. CRDB has already issued over 1 million cards. TANAPA has seen a surge in revenues due to digitization which is split with CRDB under a revenue sharing agreement.
Yusuf is a manager at a travel company that organizes customized safaris for tourists. Currently the company has eight drivers. Each driver typically escorts around five tourists per Safari - a total of 40 tourists at any give time during the peak season. Yusuf manages tourist and operator entry fee payments to the 16 National Parks covered under the Tanzania National Parks Authority and the Ngorongoro Conservation Area Authority, as well as accommodation and safari guide payments.
Prior to the launch of the TANAPA Cards for park entry fee payments, tour operators faced multiple challenges with cash payments, in particular drivers frequently faced theft of cash. The introduction of the TANAPA Cards (available both in US dollars and Tanzanian shillings) has dramatically improved safety and security for tour operators and drivers.
Now that TANAPA has banned cash fee payments to enter parks, drivers and tourists have no option but to wait until network coverage comes back up and payments are successfully authorized.
 The hospital's cashiers are equipped with CRDB POS machines that accept VISA, MasterCard and TemboCard payments.
 Patients are encouraged to retain the TemboCard. The card comes with a one-year validity and becomes dormant if not used for at least one hospital payment in a year.
Most importantly, these closed-loop payment options have become a gateway to introducing customers to digital payment instruments. CRDB has plans to integrate these closed-loop customers with its formal banking services in the near future.
Customers benefitted immediately as they were no longer required to spend hours waiting in long queues, and because they received instant acknowledgment of utility payments via mobile money. DAWASCO reports that these benefits have attracted new and dormant customers, increasing DAWASCO's customer base from 25,000 households in 2013 to 148,000 households today.
DAWASCO is currently in its second phase of modernization which involves overhauling its customer information and payment system to allow for fully automated billing, real-time visibility into payments, and the integration of a payment gateway, expected to launch in 2016. DAWASCO compensates financial service providers by giving them a percentage of the value of payments that flow through their payment systems.
Tax payments are the most common form of P2G and B2G payments globally. In Tanzania, tax inflows make up nearly 90% of government revenues excluding grants.77 However, with the tax-to-GDP ratio averaging around 12% (post rebasing of the economy78), over the past three years79 Tanzania's tax collections have managed to cover only about three-quarters of the government budget. In recent years, Tanzania has experienced lower than expected tax collections,80 particularly under Value Added Tax payments, in combination with reduced aid, and substantial outstanding arrears (including the five mandatory social benefit schemes), making tax revenues a critical payment stream for the government.
Under-reporting and nonformalization by informal businesses could be costing the Tanzanian economy anywhere between $6 billion to $9 billion i.e., nearly the entire governmental budget of 2015/2016, which was $10.28 billion.
In 2013, AT Kearney supported by VISA conducted a study on the size of shadow economies in Europe. The study estimated that as a general rule of thumb, two-thirds of the size of a shadow economy is undeclared work and one-third comes from under-reporting and non-formalization - primarily by small businesses and individuals that conduct a lot of cash transactions. If we apply the same under-reporting estimates for Tanzania, the size of under-reporting by the informal economy would be anywhere between $6 billion to $9 billion (2014 GDP estimates).
In 2012, the Tanzania Revenue Authority introduced electronic filing of VAT for large businesses (above a threshold of TZS 100 million or slightly greater than $46,000), reducing the administrative burden and cost to business of filing VAT returns. According to a detailed user guide published by the TRA, traders with a Tax Identification Number (TIN) could register for e-filing of taxes, submit their returns online, and receive an acknowledgment of tax submission. This process was a major improvement on earlier VAT filing processes. For the government, it reduced the long queues, filing, and reconciliation challenges, increasing customer convenience and hence compliance. For the users - who would typically spend at least one to two days waiting in line to file tax returns, the opportunity to electronically file taxes has helped them save time and costs, and prevent loss of business.
This store was an early adopter of e-filing and digital payments. Through e-filing, the business instantly receives an acknowledgment from the TRA and a payment reference number. The business owner can now print the reference number and directly pay at any bank branch convenient to her.
The Tanzania Revenue Authority directly compensates banks that act as collection agents. Banks receive from 0.4% and above of the value transferred, depending on their deposit base and reach. By not requiring banks to remit taxes daily, the TRA also provides a form of indirect compensation, because banks have funds at their disposal for a longer period that can be used for other revenuegenerating activities.
In fiscal year 2013/14, the Tanzania Revenue Authority introduced the Tanzania Revenue Gateway System (RGS). This payment gateway is expected to act as an interface between the TRA, the Bank of Tanzania, all commercial banks, and other financial service providers like mobile network operators. It will give customers the ability to make tax payments digitally and remotely. The RGS became fully operational in June 2015.89 The RGS system simplifies the tax payment process for millions of customers, and eliminates the potential of fraud and leakage through an automated and transparent payment process.
I. Large Value OR Tanzania Interbank Settlement System (TISS) payments Large taxpayers (i.e., those filing tax payments higher than TZS 5 million per month, or US$ 2,285) can initiate an RTGS via the TISS system. Any tax payment above this amount is directly transferred by commercial banks to the Bank of Tanzania's central collection account.
as TRA agents. In these types of payments, banks are required to remit taxes collected three times a week to the Bank of Tanzania.
Below are images of how tax payments are initiated via the new Revenue Gateway, the various payment options that are available, and payment acknowledgments.
In 2010 the Tanzania Revenue Authority made it mandatory for all tax-registered traders to start using Electronic Fiscal Devices (EFDs) in order to issue electronic receipts to customers. An EFD is typically connected to the TRA's network either through a SIM card or a computer network and is used to monitor business transactions. Electronic Fiscal Devices are a compliance tool used by revenue authorities world-wide. Every sale is electronically recorded when customer receipts are issued, giving the TRA a clear view into the tax liabilities of every VAT-registered trader (noting only traders with over TZS 100 million or US$ 46,000 in annual turnover are required to be VAT registered in Tanzania).
Even so, key issues of tax avoidance remain. Notably, not all sales are recorded, as the demand for printed receipts are customer-driven. If customers did not ask for electronic receipts, traders were sometimes willing to offer lower prices since doing so gave them the option to not record sales on fiscal devices, thus enabling them to report and pay lower taxes.
A second phase of the EFD rollout in 2013 required smaller traders with over TZS 14 million or approximately US$ 6,400 in revenue annually to start using EFDs. This requirement was met with intense resistance, protest rallies, and large market places like Kariakoo in Dar es Salaam shut down by businesses to draw attention to their opposition to EFDs and apply pressure for the policy to be reversed.
Many traders objected strongly to bearing the cost of an EFD, which was between TZS 600,000 and TZS 1 million (US$ 274 - US$ 460). The TRA did not require traders to pay this cost up front. Rather, traders had the option of paying down the cost of the EFD by deducting the cost of the device per month from their VAT obligations.
Some traders interviewed for this case study noted they might more willingly adopt EFDs if all other businesses were required to adopt them, with this requirement fully enforced, to ensure fair competition.
Hashim's bookstore has purchased and uses an electronic fiscal device, at a cost of TZS 800,000 (US$ 365.6). "This cost is fine with us. We paid TZS 800,000 plus maintainence. But some other businesses in Kariakoo complained because it was too expensive. They could not afford it," Hashim said.
Hashim thinks that service providers need to do more in the areas of agent training and support. Hashim said he received very brief training on how to use the POS devices when the store decided to become a Selcom and Maxcom agent, but wishes this training had been more rigorous.
In the case of education, several private educational institutions provide the flexibility of paying digitally, including with mobile money. However, the bulk of the private and public93 school fee payments are non-digital. Aggregators and banks in the country are working toward acquiring schools as clients, helping them digitize their databases and school-fee payments, also providing them with electronic platforms that integrate with multiple financial service providers.
Women are active participants of Tanzania's micro, small, and medium business sectors, making up 54% of owners and managers, according to the most recent Financial Sector Deepening Trust's (FSDT) Medium Small and Micro Enterprise Survey.
Florence appreciates the flexibilty and conveniece of digital payments. In fact, she has been paying her annual motor vehicle license fees and utility bills to the government via mobile money since the time digital payment became possible for these services.
This solution is currently in a pilot phase. Business Connexion plans to expand the solution to around 27 private and public hospitals in the country. This is an open loop system, meaning that patients and their families can choose the digital payment instrument of their choice to make a payment.
This presents an opportunity for the private sector and public policymakers, particularly in the central bank, to collaborate more closely to develop solutions that increase customer bases and further drive financial inclusion. More broadly, the efficiency and rates of adoption and continued usage of digital payments could be further improved by an overarching digital payments strategy, presenting another opportunity for further collaboration between the government, private sector, and development partners.
The Financial Sector Deepening Trust of Tanzania in 2010 conducted a baseline survey of micro, small, and medium enterprises (MSMEs). The study estimated that there were nearly 3.1 million MSMEs in the country contributing to nearly 27% of GDP or $12.9 billion in 2014 terms.
Emmanuel is the clearing and forwarding agent mentioned in the earlier chapter of this case study. Emmanuel's firm has a bank account; however, the firm does not use that account to make direct digital payments for import duties on the aforementioned TANCIS system. Instead, Emmanuel submits all documents online onto the TANCIS system, prints the amount due and the acknowledgment number, goes to a bank to withdraw the amount payable in cash, and then pays in cash at the bank and gets a bank slip as acknowledgment in return. If the amount is large, the bank then automatically conducts an RTGS on behalf of the company.
In order to prevent the uncertainty surrounding the acceptance of payment, Emmanuel prefers to go to the bank physically and receive a written acknowledgment. Emmanuel's firm does not see mobile money as a viable option, since wallet sizes are limited to around US$ 1,500 - US$ 1,700 or TZS 3.E-3.7 million, and most import duties for large containers are substantially over this limit.
Interestingly, among all the businesses interviewed, none said that their bank had urged them to use a digital means to pay dues to the TRA. This points to a significant role that financial service providers can play to encourage individuals and businesses to adopt digital payments. However, it is important to note that awareness is only a first step, and must be accompanied by viable pricing structures that make it more cost-effective to make payments to government digitally, as opposed to withdrawing cash from ATMs.
Additionally, a majority of businesses interviewed for this case study did not know that they could instruct their bank to transfer their income tax due from their bank account. Instead, most business owners or representatives withdraw cash from the ATM and pay their tax liability in cash at the bank.
Mobile money account holders interviewed for this case study were largely comfortable making small value payments through their phone. However, for all large value payments or time-sensitive payments (like school fees or taxes) they tended to prefer non-remote payments, either through payment agents, by paying in cash at a bank or by instructing a bank to transfer funds from their accounts. Users usually wanted a hard copy receipt of large value payments, partly because they were unclear on the legal recourse provided by SMS notifications as evidence of payment. Accordingly, a systemic shift is needed around physical acknowledgments of payment in which digital forms of payment acknowledgment are recognized as legal proof of payment.
A majority of the P2G and B2G examples below are from countries that are in the early stages of their transition from cash-heavy to cash-lite economies. They face multiple challenges, including but not limited to: a lack of payment infrastructures, low levels of consumer education and protection, unreliable financial products, and insecure networks. Despite these hurdles, many of these countries through government leadership, public-private partnerships, and innovation have helped steer their economies toward greater digitization and financial inclusion.
Kenya is the undoubted leader in East Africa in terms of innovative payment solutions, particularly mobile money (M-Pesa) - the remittance and payment solution via mobile phone that demonstrated countries could achieve rapid adoption of digital payments solutions. At the same time Kenya suffers from high levels of tax evasion; according to a recent report released by Tax Justice,102 Kenya loses close to US$ 6.26 billion dollars to tax evasion annually.
(a) iTax To address challenges including a backlog of rebates that require manual reconciliation, and increasing shortfalls in tax collections, the Kenya Revenue Authority (KRA) in 2013 moved to an online tax web portal - called "iTax." The KRA now requires all tax filing and submissions be made online. Large and medium sized companies are required to pay online. Payment is accepted via mobile money or EFT from any of the 25 banks that are connected to the site through a payment gateway. iTax aims to be a one-stop solution for all business and personal tax filing and payments.
b. Double the number of companies registered under the electronic filing system from 2 million to 4 million by fiscal year 2017/18.
(b) KRA M -Service With 68% of the Kenyan adult population registered for mobile money, in October 2014 the KRA decided to expand its channels of digital payment collections to include the acceptance of taxes, fines, and customs payments via its mobile-based platform - KRA M-Service. Using this channel, a taxpayer can generate a Payment Reference Number (PRN) or a tax e-slip / invoice number by dialing a short code, and can make payments of up to KES 70,000 or US$ 684 per day. The KRA partnered with two of the larger mobile money providers -Safaricom and Airtel - to develop and deliver this service. Customers bear a small convenience fee of KES 5 (US$ 0.05) to use the KRA M-Service.
While digital, the system falls short of being truly remote, as the taxpayer is required to print the electronic acknowledgment generated by the E-tax system, sign it and manually drop it at a URA office to confirm payment. Electronic signatures or e-confirmations by taxpayers, though legatty acceptable since 201 1109, are still not being accepted by all banks.
The Rwanda Revenue Authority (RRA) accepts individual and business taxes including all forms of income tax, VAT, excise, and motor-vehicle taxes via its e-Tax service. Individuals or businesses with a Tax Identification Number or login can register online, file, and submit taxes and pay via a bank transfer or over the counter at any commercial bank.
In many developing nations, public service delivery suffers from insufficient information, opaque payment flows, and unclear timelines. In order to overcome these challenge, Kenya, Uganda, and Rwanda have recently instituted e-citizen web portals, or as they define "Government to Citizen" and "Government to Business" service portals. Kenya's E-Citizen, Uganda's e-citizen and Rwanda's Irembo120 platforms all aim to accomplish one common payment goal - digitization of all non-tax payment to governments, and to act as one-stop solutions for various types of government services. All three portals have been recently launched and at the very least aim to include the most common government services in the coming months.
School fee payments to governments are another key P2G payment flow. Many countries studied during this exercise offer free universal primary education in public schools. However, where school fees exist, very few if any countries that are in the early stages of digitization have as yet digitized the process entirely. Cote d'Ivoire however stands out as an exception.
(c) Users benefit substantially from higher transparency and streamlined processes, freeing up substantial amounts of time to devote to more productive or personally rewarding activities.
Traditionally school fee payments in Cote d'Ivoire suffered from high levels of fraud, leakage, and theft including armed robbery at local collection points, resulting in substantial revenue losses for the government.
The process began with MENET overhauling its student database, improving the quality of information, and providing each student with a unique student ID. MENET then piloted the initiative in the capital city Abidjan with CelPaid, an online payment provider, and MTN Mobile Money. Over the next three years, the Government of Cote d'Ivoire entered into partnerships with three telecom providers and one online payment service provider, and integrated the MENET database with the four payment providers. By 2014, MENET was collecting 99% of its school registration fees digitally - 94% of which were via mobile money and 6% online.
In 2010 Uganda's National Social Security Fund (NSSF), a quasigovernment entity that covers private sector workers in the formal sector,122 went through a major restructuring process whereby it increased its ability to accept payments from employers via electronic payments from most commercial banks, and digitized its account opening, management, and tracking system. NSSF's digital platform now allows employees to track whether their employers have paid their portion of the mandated social contribution payments.123 When introduced for the first time, this transparent tracking feature significantly increased compliance rates among employer contributions.
II. Definition and Framework Workshop: CGAP, Karandaaz, and BTCA conducted a two-day brainstorming workshop to agree on the definitional aspects of P2G and B2G payments.
IV. Sharing of workshop findings: BTCA conducted a half-day workshop with 19 governments, donor, and industry representatives on April 6th, 2016 in Dar es Salaam. Comments and feedback from the workshop have been incorporated into the study.
The criteria that influenced the selection of P2G and B2G examples in this study were relevance, diversity of payment use case, opportunity to learn from the successes and failures of these initiatives, and the availability of data from primary or secondary sources to support information gathered during qualitative interviews. The choice of P2G and B2G examples in this study therefore do not aim to be comprehensive.
a. Digitization of P2G and B2G payments can lead to efficiency gains and cost-savings as it lowers overhead costs associated with manual cash-management128 & processes, reduces opportunities for fraud and mismanagement of cash, and eliminates the time and direct costs associated with manual reconciliation of payments.
b. Financial Inclusion: Digital payments can be the first entry point into the financial system for individuals and businesses. Governments can enforce the acceptance of digital only payments (e.g., Kenya's itax), requiring individuals and businesses to open and use accounts.
a. Streamlining information, simplification, standardization, and where possible consolidation of various payments to the government can dramatically improve compliance. For example: The World Bank's ease of doing business report assesses the ease of paying taxes and it reports that a regular business in Tanzania has to pay 49 different taxes, fees, and levies every year - resulting in a minimum of 179 hours or a minimum of 7.4 days spent on tax payments annually.
c. Cost to the payer is another key variable that impacts adoption. Reducing or eliminating digital payment transaction cost to the end user, for government payments, can positively influence uptake.
e. Well-structured incentives, like ease of gaining credit based on digital tax history, or discounts have the potential of encouraging payments.
 Mobile money providers (alternative digital channels) might not be willing to lower payer-to-government transaction costs as it might undermine their business model.
1. $300 million through better compliance of VAT payments and at least another $177 million by formalizing the informal economy (Author estimates, detailed in Chapter 5 of this study).
19. This section was produced in collaboration with CGAP and Karandaaz Pakistan, which is currently conducting a global mapping of digital P2G payments.
92. Tanzania has universal primary education; so public school tuition fees are free. Parents only pay the enrolment fees.
100. EFTs include direct debit, wire transfers, direct deposits, ATM withdrawals, and online bill pay services among intra and inter bank accounts over a computerized network. Transactions are processed through an automated clearing house.
The Better Than Cash Alliance Case Study Series Our case study series (remove "studies") seeks to highlight specific examples of shifts from cash to digital payments by government agencies, companies and development partners. Each case study aims to provide insights for a wide audience on the factors that have helped or hindered the digitization process, and also present key results and benefits of the transition away from cash. We hope that readers will be able to adapt the lessons from these cases to their own contexts and local conditions.
This is a first of its kind case study mapping key digital Person-to-Government (P2G) and Business-to-Government (B2G) payments and trends in an individual country - in this case Tanzania. This endeavor would have been impossible without the constant commitment, encouragement, and support of a few key individuals and organizations that played an instrumental role in shaping this study.
I thank Muyangwa Muyangwa Charles and Alain Vandepeute from the International Monetary Fund (IMF) for providing important local context on Tanzania's payment systems, the modernization efforts of the Tanzania Revenue Authority (TRA) and more. I thank Seronga Wangwe of Business Connexions and Samir Hirji of Selcom for their insights into effective digital payments systems. I'm grateful to the teams at Brand Fusion, and the Better Than Cash Alliance (BTCA) - particularly Camilo Tellez and Angela Corbalan - for their collaboration, insights, and introductions to numerous agents, informal businesses, and customers in Tanzania. I also thank my colleagues at CGAP - especially Stefan Staschen and members of the Dalberg team conducting the Global P2G Landscape Study for their insights and feedback.