In recent years, the e-/eam/ng model has grown steadily as a higher education option and is expected to continue expanding across the globe. According to Ambient Insight Research, the worldwide market for "self-paced e-learning' reached LISS46.9 billion in 2015, a significant increase from the LIS$32.1 billion generated in 2010.
In this context. Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) have especially set themselves apart as effective forms of e-learning. As the article "The Consolidation of Digital Education" (in Spanish) explains, MOOCs emerged in 2008, but their expansion and massive popularity did not take place until early 2012, when three large platforms were founded: Udacity, Coursera, and EdX. These and other platforms are complemented by the Khan Academy, another actor that has revolutionized virtual education in the last decade (although mainly in secondary education).
 Access to education by traditionally excluded groups has increased. 68% percent of universities report e-learning has benefitted people living in rural areas, 53% report benefits to women, 50% to low-income groups, and 38% to people with disabilities.
 Many e-learning programs are not in sync with the demands of the labor market. Only 26% of universities believe that their e-learning focuses on specific skills desired by employers.
Beyond these results, the interviews conducted with Latin American experts made it clear that there is consensus on a few key issues. First, the incorporation of ICTs into education systems in the region remains low and has primarily focused on improving administrative processes rather than pedagogical methods. Second, many higher education institutions have been reluctant to incorporate e-learning into their schools, even though technology offers the opportunity to experiment with new teaching and learning models. Third, e-learning programs have the potential to help overcome common challenges such as improving access and connecting the education system to labor market demands. Lastly, education policies can have a significant impact on the adoption of new technologies in education.
 The access to ICTs in education must be expanded in order to take full advantage of e-learning benefits and to avoid the negative effect of the digital gap. This implies larger investments in order to adopt new technologies and adapt existing ones and, thus, greater financing. Effective public-private partnerships are needed, as well as progressive regulations and greater flexibility in the academic field.
 The role of higher education must be reassessed in a context of globalization and constant technological change. Labor market demands will require universities to cooperate and connect amongst themselves to design and implement new teaching and learning methods.
Ambient Insight Research (2016). "The 2015-2020 Worldwide Self-paced eLearning Market: Premium Edition". Telefonica Foundation & Ariel (2015). MOOCs in the Education of the Future: Digitizing Training. Madrid, Spain.
The Inter-American Dialogue engages our network of global leaders to foster democratic governance, prosperity, and social equity in Latin America and the Caribbean. Together, we work to shape policy debate, devise solutions, and enhance cooperation within the Western Hemisphere.