With funding from the Rockefeller Foundation under its Inclusive Economies goal, Practical Action, a UK NGO which seeks to promote technology justice, and WIEGO, a global network which seeks to empower the working poor in the informal economy, partnered on a research project designed to investigate what technologies are currently impacting - and are likely to impact - on the livelihoods of the working poor in positive or negative ways; how the working poor are responding to these impacts; and what technologies they need to enable their work, enhance their production, and secure their livelihoods.
 existing and emerging technologies which may remain inaccessible to the working poor in the informal economy, and may create positive and/or negative outcomes for them: for example by displacing work opportunities or decreasing value chains strongly related to informal work.
 Focus Groups: 7 tools developed by WIEGO - modified version of Focus Group tools developed by WIEGO with Caroline Moser, a well-known urban scholar, for earlier WIEGO-led study in 10 cities of changes in the urban informal economy.
 Phone Survey: developed by WIEGO - conducted with 18 organizations of informal workers around the developing world to get a wider comparative understanding of technological change and adaptation in the informal economy.
This report also draws on the findings from a 2012 study in 10 cities, including Ahmedabad, Durban and Lima, by WIEGO and local partners designed to interrogate what is driving change in the urban informal economy and how urban informal workers respond to change (WIEGO nd). This study is known as the Informal Economy Monitoring Study (IEMS).
A defining feature of most informal workers is that they do not work in so-called "standard" workplaces - such as factories, firms, offices or shops. Rather, they tend to work in private homes (as home-based workers in their own homes or as domestic workers in the homes of others) or in public spaces (streets, open areas, natural markets, and construction sites). Many street vendors work in natural markets, areas of cities where vendors and hawkers have congregated over the years due to the steady flow of pedestrians - potential customers - through the area. These natural markets tend to form in and around transport nodes, residential areas or public institutions such as schools, hospitals, wholesale markets or sport complexes. These natural markets generate other livelihood activities such as, in the case of Warwick Junction in Durban, for barrow operators, transport workers, garment makers and waste pickers. Often, as in all three study cities, these open air natural markets are located around historic wholesale markets. Informal market traders operate from stalls in built wholesale or retail markets, as in the Early Morning Market in Durban.
Among some sectors of informal workers, there is a hierarchy of workplaces. For instance, among street vendors, some vend from baskets or mats on the ground, others from pushcarts of various types and sizes, still others from carts some of which feature display units, and yet others from kiosks or other semi-permanent structures. And, among waste pickers, some collect and source waste from homes or offices, others from the street or municipal bins, still others from collection depots or landfills. Each place of work is associated with its own opportunities, costs and risks to the workers. See photo collages of workplaces in each study city.
2 It is also worth noting that one of the groups of barrow operators was worried about sharing any information about their barrows, because they feared that the findings produced through this study would be shared with municipal authorities who would then confiscate their barrows and leave them without a livelihood.
Explaining Basic Technology: Value Chain Dynamics - There are some differences in the basic tools used across the study cities, reflecting differences in the city context. In Durban, South Africa, waste pickers sell their recyclables to mobile waste dealers who drive around the market area looking for recyclable waste to buy, either from the itinerant waste pickers or directly from shopkeepers. The Durban waste pickers use trolleys to haul their waste around the market area: see photo collage of different types of trolleys used in Durban.
In Ahmedabad, the waste dealers are not mobile and the waste pickers have to transport their recyclables to the dealers' shops which are often at some distance from their collection routes. Most Ahmedabad waste pickers, therefore, have to hire rickshaws - bicycle rickshaws or (if they can afford them) motorized rickshaws - to transport their recyclables to the point of sale. As one waste picker group reported: "Bicycle rickshaw drivers charge thirty rupees round-trip whereas auto rickshaw drivers charge more than fifty rupees." (Ahmedabad, WP, FG 2) In Lima, waste pickers also use sacks for collection. In inner-city districts of Lima it is only recyclers higher in the value chain who have motorized transport (such as trucks) to collect recyclables. But in the outlying districts, waste pickers need vehicles to transport their recyclables to the nearest buyer, including: moto-taxis or three-wheelers that can be pedalled, pushed, or are motorized.
(Durban, WP FG9). Second, the waste pickers no longer carry knives or blades for fear of being arrested under the "Nuisances and Behaviour in Public Space" law adopted by the Durban eThekwini municipal council in June 2015.3 This restriction is particularly hard on the cardboard recyclers who need knives to break down cardboard boxes and cut rope to tie the cardboard pieces to their trolleys. One woman cardboard recycler reported that she uses a piece of glass to cut the tape that binds the boxes - and that the glass cuts her hand.
Consider the case of Nhlanhla, a water porter in Warwick Junction, who supplies water to cooked food vendors and other street vendors in the market. Earlier, Nhlanhla transported water containers on a shopping cart that he bought from other water porters. But the police would harass him and often confiscate the cart. Since 2010, Nhlanhla has used a trolley which he has modified by adding two bread crates, salvaged from the side of the road.
An added advantage of these modified trolleys is that they do not draw the attention of the police in the same way the shopping carts trolley do. Unfortunately, this does not apply to the thieves in the neighbourhood. One of the biggest obstacles Nhlanhla faces in his business is the regular theft of his modified trolley. Since 2010, he estimates that his trolley has been stolen more than 20 times, three to four times per year. When this happens he is saddled with the cost of purchasing and modifying a new trolley. This takes about a week to obtain and forces him to return to the use of a shopping cart in the meantime (Durban Mi cro-N arrative).
away, arrested or fined by authorities. In Lima, both waste pickers and market porters identified their uniforms - either a vest or a pullover with a logo - as important work tools because they signal that the municipality has authorized them as workers. They also bring an added protective component to work: the recyclers' vests, for example, have a reflective strip that helps make them visible at night, when many are out collecting waste from households.
the fact that the garment makers belong to SEWA means that they can access loans to purchase improved sewing machines.
The photo documentation methodology generated great interest among the respondents, who showed different levels of pride in their work tools. When approached to participate in the study, one street vendor in Lima said "you want to take a photo of this old, ugly knife?" But once she was convinced, she wanted a photo taken of her knife. Some respondents were very knowledgeable about the wide variety of tools available and why workers would choose one over another; for example, the Lima fieldwork identified several types of scales, including hanging scales, manual scales, and digital scales of all ages and sizes.
4 Juki machines are also owned and used by a home-based worker cooperative in Bangkok, Thailand supported by HomeNet Thailand, a member of the WIEGO network.
' both communitie-s of s-Lreetve-ndor work jrder/in similar CO n ditiors a rtd e nvirortm en Ls.
' the screens affirm this approach through tentative decision making clustered around the hub of 4 scales.
* aside from 2 scale variations, it is notable that in these regiorially separated comparisons the screens  mirror'oneanother, indicating that informal workerswill respond similarly with regards to their technology choices ifthereis work place insecurity or harassment.
* the comparisons are isdrawn from the same sectorbutdistinctly different contexts. Ahmedabad informal workers ere significantly well organized byen MBO: Durban informal workers are faceddaily insecurityas a result of public prejudice endj'or primitive enforcement: Lima exemplifies informal workers actively supported by local government or co-operatives alongside individuals who have survivalist livelihoods.
' notwithstandingthese differences the informal workers appear clearthat their sector requires function specific / expedient tools ie. they are opinionated regarding their technology choice.
Each occupational group identified new or improved tools being used in their sector: either by others doing the same tasks as themselves or others doing different tasks further up the value chain. It is important to note that, when asked about new technologies, many participants considered a tool to be 'new' if it was recently acquired by them, even if it had existed in their sector for a long time.
Some of the construction workers in Ahmedabad are manual laborers sifting sand, mixing cement, and carrying cement and bricks; while others are skilled masons or carpenters using tradesmen tools as well as machines owned by their contractors or the construction company.
Some of the incense stick rollers in Ahmedabad no longer hand-roll sticks in their homes but are employed in small workshops to operate rolling machines. The garment makers in Ahmedabad discussed newer models of electrical sewing machines; gadgets for stitching buttonholes, hemming, and interlocking; embroidery machines and cutting machines: which they need to enter the ready-made, especially modern, garment sector and to better compete in the traditional garment sector. Referring to the industrial-grade electrical sewing machine brand popular in both Ahmedabad and Durban, one garment maker in Ahmedabad stated, "The Juki machine is very expensive. It is useful for those who stitch ready-made clothes." (Ahmedabad, Garment Maker FG 4). See photo collage of existing and emerging tools in Ahmedabad.
over twenty years. The workshops make carts to order to match the design preferences of the street vendors, including: number and size of shelves, storage areas or glass panels. As one workshop owner explained: "Everything is doable, the thing is for them (the customers) to be satisfied". The workshops and their customers work together to come up with a joint design, often referring to photos in design catalogues. The workshops can then advertise and offer these "improved" designs to new customers.
In the waste sector in Lima, the most significant emerging technologies are related to the transport of recyclable materials. Moto-taxis have been around for a long time, but recently some users have begun to modify them to carry materials instead of passengers. These have begun to replace motorized three-wheelers which have been banned as too dangerous: a motorized three-wheeler places all the cargo in the front, which can obstruct the driver's vision and otherwise cause accidents, whereas a modified moto-taxi places the cargo in back. However, only a few waste pickers can afford a modified moto-taxi, and they are mostly men. One female waste picker said she owned one but "I still haven't learned how to drive it" (Lima, 4T-TA). In general, though, the informal workers in Lima are using old technologies far more widely than new technologies. See photo collage of existing and emerging tools in Lima.
In some cases, technological change is driven by market transactions in combination with local ingenuity. Consider the case of Juliet Michunu who makes and sells grass mats in Warwick Junction in Durban. Around 2011, Juliet bought a weaving frame for 200 rand from a man who came round the market selling them. This was the first time she had seen such a device, but it quickly caught on, and today most of the traders at her market who make mats have one too. Whereas a hand woven mat takes two full days to make, a mat made on the weaving frame can be produced in one and half days, or even a single day, halving the time required.
In addition to the weaving frame, Juliet Mchunu's business has also benefitted from the use of other technologies. Like seamstress Sizakele Ncube in the Berea Station market she uses a cell phone to confirm orders and make appointments with her customers (Durban Micro-Narrative).
The need for appropriate and cost-effective transport has spawned technologies such as the market barrow (modelled on those used in Covent Garden in the UK); the ingenious addition of wheels to a chassis made from salvaged items to form a conveyance; and the appropriation of commercially available equipment (notably supermarket trolleys). Operating or owning a conveyance is a risky activity as it is routinely confiscated by authorities or stolen, thus the ingenuity evident in the salvaging and adapting of technology has significant economic logic.
Informal garment makers in Durban produce low-cost and often unique products, including: pinafores that are worn as protective work gear and ceremonial attire for both cultural and religious functions. These products are both mass produced and tailor-made: some have artistic embellishments which require particular types of sewing machines and equipment. There is ample evidence that the informal garment makers make fit-for-purpose decisions in selecting and using technology. It is also significant that some of the options are global technologies as evidenced by the fact that both Durban and Ahmedabad garment makers prefer the same brand (Juki) of industrial grade sewing machine. See photo collage of existing and emerging technologies in Durban.
South Africa has high mobile phone and internet costs. Although internet-based mobile messaging applications are becoming popular, the most pervasive communication technology used by informal workers is still the basic model mobile phone. What is intriguing are the ways in which informal workers maximize the capability of their phones for phone calls and text messaging, not least of which is to own sim cards from various networks. By using these various sim cards interchangeably informal workers are able to access the preferred or discounted rates competitively offered by the networks. This reflects an astute understanding and exploitation of one aspect of IT.
Chandaben Dipakbhai Chetwani, a garment maker in Ahmedabad, bought a Juki, an industrial-grade electric sewing machine, in 2011. Using the Juki machine has increased her productivity and decreased her maintenance costs. Work that would have taken one whole day with an ordinary machine can be done in five to six hours on the Juki machine. Moreover, the simpler electrical machine used to get damaged quite frequently (once every two to three months) but the Juki machine requires maintenance only once a year. Also, using the Juki, Chandaben can stitch different types of fabrics (silk, thick plastic) using different types of stitches. Chandaben is proud that she can replicate new designs or patterns on her own and is keen to learn new techniques.
Impact of Technological Change on Quantity and Quality of Work - The study explored not only why workers adopt certain technologies or tools, but also what their perceptions are about the impact of technological change on the quality and quantity of work opportunities available to them. Most tools were viewed as having a positive impact on both quality and quantity of work opportunities. In terms of quality, all were seen to help make the work easier or more efficient in some way, but several tools were also known to present occupational health and safety hazards. In terms of quantity, the focus groups noted that several tools make them more productive but are not easy to afford or maintain and that when other workers are able to buy these tools their own work opportunities are threatened.
Market traders in Lima buy the cheapest Chinese brands of digital scales, so they do not have to worry about their investment and the fact that it is difficult to find good technicians: "They are disposable, but for that price it is affordable." (Lima, MV, FG 11). Market porters are interested to learn how to repair their manual forklifts, they have learned some basic maintenance procedures and try to keep their tools in good condition. Waste pickers who have acquired three-wheelers reported that they have to keep an eye on them because "they are attractive and well maintained and, therefore, are wanted" by thieves (Lima, WP, FG 8).
Given the emerging technologies and other changes in the sample sectors, some existing technologies are fading or disappearing. Consider the technological changes reported in Ahmedabad. Perhaps most notably, incense stick rolling is being mechanized. This mechanization has the advantage of increasing production (the machines can produce 120-140 sticks per minute) and decreasing pollution and occupational hazards. However, the owner of an incense stick factory estimated that this mechanization has resulted in 8 out of 10 workers losing their jobs (Chandak Interview). Also, there is competition in the sector from a different longer variety of incense sticks imported from China and Vietnam. So the future for women who hand-roll incense sticks is uncertain. As one hand-roller commented: "One machine can replace five to six women." (Ahmedabad, IS, FG 3).
The mechanization of sewing machines has impacted on garment makers in Durban. A few older workers continue to use hand and foot powered machines, but younger workers have switched to the more expensive electric machines. However, whilst the new machines allow for increases in production, they also increase competition, particularly from foreigners who are able to afford the higher end machines. "Machines create jobs for people from other countries" complained one garment maker (Durban, GM, FG 7).
In the waste sector, the primary collection and transportation of waste is increasingly being done by garbage workers with trucks. But the modern garbage collection system does not sort out or reclaim recyclables. The informal waste pickers continue to do this important task using the same basic tools - but their task is made more difficult because they have to compete for waste with the private garbage collection companies who are paid by the ton for hauling waste to landfills or incinerators and with the garbage collection workers who syphon off some recyclables for themselves. Whilst co-operatives of informal waste pickers in India may theoretically apply for local government waste management tenders, in Ahmedabad they are required to first deposit a large sum of money. This effectively excludes such organizations from the tender process (Mahadevia Interview). Also, the waste that is available is no longer in open spaces, but in large bins, depots or landfills, making access more difficult.
Little, if any, consideration is given in mainstream technology design to the production of tools for informal traditional crafts or trades because of their unique requirements and presumed limited demand. This means that informal workers, on their own or through their own organizations, must adapt or change technologies in response to changing demands and circumstances. But sometimes they work with local manufacturers to design new equipment: as with the regulation-driven changes in street vending carts in Lima.
1. Traditional shoe repairers cannot repair moulded/bonded shoes using their traditional stitching techniques so now use adhesives.
3. Electronic inverters are being used to convert direct to alternating current, enabling conventional electrical appliances (e.g. barbers' clippers) to operate with rechargeable batteries.
Consider also the sample in Durban. The waste pickers reported that middlemen use vans and trucks to transport recyclables and that the waste dealers use digital scales: but waste pickers do not use either of these preferred technologies. One group of waste pickers complained that the waste dealer manipulates his scale when weighing the recyclables that they sell to him: " He lowers (the weight) by a kilogram; his scale is being manipulated by him, it does not move He manipulates the scale and it is very bad for us and especially our survival." (Durban, WP, FG 7). The shoe repairers noted that only those who make shoes use a cobbler's last (foot-shaped form) - not those who repair shoes.
In Lima, a higher percentage of market porters and waste pickers than of street vendors and market traders identified new technologies (Figure 1). But the street vendors and market traders placed a good deal of importance on new technology, especially digital scales and ICTs.
The technological choices made by cities in regard to large infrastructure systems have major, but not well understood, impacts on the livelihoods of informal workers: as does the decision by some cities to privatize these systems. In the focus groups, each occupational group was asked to discuss three city-wide technological systems - energy, transport and waste; and to rank which system had the biggest, medium and least impact on their livelihoods and whether the impact was positive, negative or mixed.
In terms of degree of significance, the city-wide systems were ranked quite similarly across the study cities. The energy system was ranked as most significant by garment makers in both Ahmedabad and Durban, as most use electric sewing machines, and by incense stick rollers in Ahmedabad, who need electricity to be able to work at night. The transport sector was ranked as most significant by street vendors, market traders, market porters and transport workers; and was also significant for garment makers in Durban who operate at a train station. The waste sector was very significant to the waste pickers and of limited significance to the other sectors.
There is a national energy crisis in South Africa today with frequent unpredictable load shedding and power outages which are having significant negative impacts on all sectors in the Durban sample.
Regular electrical supply is of critical importance to the productivity of garment makers who use electrical sewing machines. At Berea Station in Durban, electricity supply regularly overloads and cuts out, on average twice a week. Sizakele Ncuba and her fellow seamstresses suspect that the music sellers, who operate in another part of the Berea station area playing their wares full-blast, are responsible. As a result the power can be out for the whole day and there is nothing the seamstresses can do except cut material while they wait. This leads to a loss in business, as if a garment is not ready for collection by the agreed upon date and time, the customer will often cancel the order all together and demand a refund (Durban Micro-Narrative).
Other problems with city transport systems were mentioned by the focus groups. In Durban, one group of cardboard recyclers noted: "We share the road with motorists as not all roads have pedestrian pavement (i.e. sidewalks); while we are pushing our trolley (inqola) full of cardboard, motorists swear at us." (Durban, WP, FG 11). Although Durban has recently developed a non-motorized transport policy, it caters only for recreational cyclists and pays no attention to the needs of the barrow operators who are estimated to transport approximately 100 tons of goods around the city on a daily basis, often risking their lives on busy highways to do so (Dobson Interview).
 Street Vendors: "Without transport we can't reach our workplaces." (Durban, SV, FG 1); "To us, transport is the most important system." (Durban, SV, FG 3); "We cannot go anywhere without transport: it is the main key system." (Durban, SV, FG 3); "If there are no customers come to town, we are not able to sell or have work. It is important for customers to come to us." (Durban, SV, FG 3).
In Lima, transport is considered the second most important problem in the city, after insecurity. The public transport system was privatized in the 1990s and since then, transport services have been provided by a chaotic mix of small and medium private companies. In addition, road infrastructure has been insufficient, resulting in increasing congestion, chaos and paralysis. In recent years, the government built two subway lines and a metropolitan bus line in Lima. However, these investments have proved to be insufficient to meet demand. The previous municipal administration began a reform of the transport sector that the current administration has not continued. The central government is now building a third subway line.
Another problem is that the schedule of the trains and buses does not meet the needs of informal workers. Waste pickers, for example, said, "(The transport system) does not help us. Sometimes the buses do not want to pick us up." Another said, "Sometimes I might wait until very late [in the night] and they (buses) do not pick us up." (Lima, WP, FG 6).
charge; [the issue is] simply that they do not want to take us with our packages." (Lima, MT, FG 12). And a street vendor said: "The transport system is chaotic, it is out of control." Another added, "The worst thing is moto-taxis because they crash and drive away; they do whatever they want. People are walking and motos do not care." Also, the mass transit schedule does not match the working hours of the vendors: "(t)he metro works until 10 pm. So when I am done there is no metro." (Lima, SV, FG 14).
The implementation of a Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) system is currently in its early stages in Durban. The municipality is aware that the system will realign urban space and potentially disrupt natural markets throughout the city (Estevez Interview). With the collaboration of Asiye eTafuleni a paper plan of a model transport node which incorporates informal traders has been developed, although whether this will be implemented is questionable (Estevez Interview, Dobson Interview). Asiye eTafuleni continues to be critical of the BRT system, arguing that it is based on a model which views "frictionless" public transport, which minimizes interactions with public spaces, as the ideal, rather than promoting friction as way to increase economic opportunities (Dobson Interview).
In Ahmedabad, around 2010, the city began to privatize waste management; today, the private waste collection system now covers about 70 per cent of the city (estimate of Indian Academy of Self-Employed Women). In those parts of the city where there are municipal waste bins, the waste pickers can reclaim waste from those bins. But not all areas have municipal bins and in some areas that do, the municipal street cleaners or the private garbage collection workers reclaim waste for themselves.
Boxes 7, 8 and 9 summarize how each technological system affects livelihoods in the different sectors and whether these changes were negative (increased costs or displaced workers/ livelihoods) and/or positive.
"Now there is more discipline in Surco, there are areas where there are many people who do not throw their trash. The Municipality is putting underground containers for recycled materials, so neighbours only take away trash. Another thing that is happening in the district is that increasingly there are places where you can bring recycled materials as donation campaigns for different sick children and other problems.
The phone survey of 18 organizations of informal workers in Asia, Africa and Latin America confirmed the focus group findings on the impact of city-wide technological systems on the livelihoods of informal workers. In terms of the energy system, around three-quarters of the organizations reported that lack of electricity reduces the productivity of their members. Solar power was seen to be the main emerging energy technology for informal workers; but solar energy is still quite expensive according to several MBO leaders surveyed. In terms of the transport system, the organizations of workers reported that buses, both public and private, are the most important form of transport for their members. The organizations confirmed several common problems associated with the existing bus transport systems: high cost (relative to earnings), lack of frequent and regular services, and bans on transporting goods. All of the organizations confirmed that affordable transport is essential to the livelihoods of their members; and half reported that their members cannot afford the existing transport options.
other hand, the organizations viewed mechanization in waste processing and treatment quite favorably as it can enhance the dignity and earnings and reduces the physical labour of waste pickers, provided the mechanized technology is in the hands of waste pickers rather than in the hands of the dealers they sell to.
Consider, for example, the situation of Benedict Matlalo and other metal scrap recyclers in Durban. The essential tools of their trade, used to break down appliances and other sources of metal, are a hammer, a chisel, a screwdriver or spanner, and an axle saw. In an ironic twist of fate, possession of these tools - which are essential for their livelihoods - also make them vulnerable to police harassment and confiscation. As Benedict explained, the tools they use in their scrap metal recycling business are the same ones that criminals use to break into houses.
In sum, how a city perceives and approaches the informal economy and what a city does in terms of infrastructure services are critical determinants of whether the working poor are able to take advantage of technology. As Richard Dobson of Asiye eTafuleni put it: "Provision of infrastructure is a defining pathway for the uptake and use of higher-order technology." See Appendix III for full-length interview with Richard Dobson.
The focus group discussions revealed that informal workers are using mobile phones in their work and in their organizing efforts more than any other ICT: see Table 6 and Infographic. In terms of intensity of use of ICTs in work, on a scale of 1-10, mobile phones ranked 5.5 (Ahmedabad), 8.5 (Durban) and 7.8 (Lima) And, in terms of intensity of use in organizing, mobile phones ranked 6.2 (Ahmedabad), 3.9 (Durban) and 6.7 (Lima).
Note: Respondents were asked to rate the importance of mobile and Internet technology on a scale of 1-10, where 1 is not at all important and 10 is very important.
LirPo and Durbc}ri'i:ilm:l vetldOr  wiirkera ihdrecl SCOrC for value of r ot lo phonos lOT thpir worlc (7.8), eenpftrod to their ret  ective value of pliur'4fsjn ificir mydiuriiig m Liive '5) and in Dv rben (S.2).
Consider the case of Sizakele Ncube, the garment maker at the Berea Station in Durban, South Africa. Sizakele uses her mobile phone to take orders from clients and to make appointments without meeting them face to face. And when orders come in from further afield, like Cape Town, she asks her clients to SMS their measurements so that she can make their garments to order, an arrangement which has enabled her to expand her client base beyond her immediate geographical reach (Durban Micro-Narrative).
generate extra work opportunities: for example, to arrange contracts to use their three-wheelers to transport furniture or materials.
The phone survey of 18 organizations of informal workers in Asia, Africa and Latin America, conducted by WIEGO, confirmed the focus group findings on the use of ICTs, and mobile phones in particular, by informal workers in their work and also their organizing efforts. Ninety per cent of the organizations reported that their members use a mobile phone; forty per cent said their members use smart phones and social media; one third reported that their members use "apps" or other internet technologies. Only five per cent of the organizations reported that their members do not use ICTs on a regular basis in their work. In terms of what ICTs are used for, seventy per cent of the organizations said that their members use ICTs to contact suppliers (e.g. to check the availability and price of supplies or stock they need); and over half of the organizations said that their members used ICTs to contact customers and for organizing purposes. However, in many cases, MBO leaders acknowledged that low levels of literacy or lack of skills and knowledge still represent significant barriers to their members being able to use ICTs in their work. In South Africa there is also a significant cost barrier because of high network prices (Dobson Interview).
It should be noted that the use of basic technologies can have an impact on organising. A key informant in Durban observed that work technologies (rather than ICTs specifically) play a role in bringing workers together: "particular sorts of technologies start to develop a sector of informal workers, which in themselves slowly start to aggregate out into a larger group of people doing the same thing. And therefore there would be common interest and they would organize around that. So, definitely the cohort of garment makers are a result of people who use sewing machines, similar sewing machines that have similar challenges of getting electricity, they have similar challenges of needing to get them serviced, maintained and stored. There is a kind of rallying point definitely the technologies as in the past start to form guilds of people that are doing similar things" (Dobson Interview).
But it should be noted that more advanced internet-based ICTs may not be practical or useful. During a joint pilot project of Asiye eTafuleni and WIEGO in Durban, funded by the Rockefeller Foundation's Centennial Fund, two digital technologies to empower street vendors in urban disaster risk management were tested. The first of these was the Ushahidi Platform (www.ushahidi.com), and the second was Frontline SMS (www.frontlinesms.com). The Ushahidi Platform, developed as a means to map information from multiple sources, was used in this project to develop a digital map of fire and sanitation hazards in Warwick Junction. Frontline SMS, a web-based tool which allows for sending and receiving of bulk SMS's, was used in this project to reinforce messages about health and safety to individual vendors who had attended an occupational health and safety training course.
There are several important lessons to be taken from these experiments with digital technology. The use of digital technology can certainly add value to a project, particularly when it provides relevant information to the beneficiaries. However, there are limitations. In the Durban case, vendors did not have smart phones, which limited what could be done with Ushahidi. Vendors also require sustained capacity building programmes if they are to be able to engage with this technology successfully - it cannot be assumed that this will happen naturally or immediately. Finally, and perhaps most importantly, digital technology does not exist in isolation from the systems in which it is embedded. In the case of the health messages, traders who had attended the occupational health and safety course offered by Asiye eTafuleni and WIEGO were found to be more likely to change their health behaviours than those who had not attended the course.
The evidence also indicates that organizations informal workers can and do help their members to make technological choices, to jointly acquire expensive technology, and to negotiate the wider environment. Organizations of informal workers have helped their members negotiate a) access to raw materials (including waste); b) secure workplaces and storage spaces; c) basic infrastructure services at their homes and workplaces; d) accessible and affordable transport services; e) permits or licenses to work; and f) contracts to provide public goods and services -all of which make it more likely that informal workers can invest in improved technologies.
The findings also suggest that informal workers and their organizations are beginning to use ICTs in their work and organizing: but informal workers use mainly simple mobile phones while organizations of informal workers are beginning to use internet and online platforms (see Box 13).
To date, little, if any attention, has been given to development of technology for the working poor in the informal economy. Meanwhile, informal workers have been adapting their existing work technologies to match new work opportunities and adapting their existing work to meet new technological challenges: but largely on their own in a negative policy and regulatory environment. As one street vendor in Lima observed, informal workers belong to "a different world": a world that is either invisible to or stigmatized by government, the private sector and the general public. To make cities more inclusive and technology more just for informal workers, governments and other key stakeholders need to recognize and value informal livelihoods and workers; to take them into account - to listen to their needs - when designing systems, policies and regulations.
new ways driven by technology. Workers are linked through production and distribution chains to employers and customers in other countries, driven by both trade and technology. These technological changes have contributed to the persistence of informal employment in many places and the emergence of informal employment in new guises and unexpected places.
Yet we know relatively little about how technology impacts individual informal workers at the bottom of the economic pyramid. Little, if any, attention has been paid to the tools or technology needed by informal workers to pursue their livelihoods or to the impact of new technologies on their livelihoods: This research project has begun to bridge this gap. While there is a widespread belief in technology as a driver of dynamism and growth, not enough attention is paid to the winners and losers of technological change and economic growth. Further, little attention has been paid to informal units and activities in technology development and design.
There is growing interest in innovation within the informal economy but most of the studies focus on the behaviour or resources of the individual informal worker (i.e., whether s/he is willing to take entrepreneurial risks and/or has cash to invest); the role of informal institutions (family, community, networks); and linkages with formal firm (Daniels 2010; Harriss 2014).
Yet those who forecast changes in the formal economy look at wider vectors of change, including demographic, political and economic trends, as they intersect with the development of technology.9 These change vectors also impact the informal economy. Informal workers in Asia and Africa have much to learn from the experience of informal workers in Latin America, where more countries are middle income and where more cities have undergone "modernization", including large urban renewal and infrastructure schemes. As a region, compared to Asia and Africa, Latin America has a wider variety of markets along the continuum from informal to formal - with a lot in between - and more privatized waste management systems (and also more organized waste pickers). The relatively modernized economies, like Peru, demand more modern technologies: for instance, stainless steel vending carts with display stands. In Latin America, more waste pickers are organized into cooperatives which have struggled for access to waste and for sorting sheds and processing equipment; and a few waste picker cooperatives have won municipal bids to sort, reclaim and transport waste.
For the foreseeable future, the responsibility for ensuring that technology trends will help - not hinder - the working poor in the informal economy rests with the informal workers themselves, their organizations and their supporters. The ground level realities examined by the current research and documented in this report considered together with the joint normative frameworks of the project partners suggest a way forward.
The WIEGO network and our partners in the current research study have experience in supporting informal workers with acquiring collective assets and/or engaging in collective bargaining and negotiations. The largest, oldest and most comprehensive organizations, SEWA, engages in collective bargaining with its members on an on-going basis and has developed multiple collective assets, including a shop that sells thread, needles and other supplies at reasonable prices to garment makers; a trade facilitation unit the provides design and marketing services to home-based workers; and a training center that trains women construction workers in masonry and other construction-related skills. Asiye eTafuleni has designed not only improved stalls or stands for individual street vendors and improved trolleys for individual waste pickers in Durban but also portable first-aid stands that are collectively owned and managed. And WIEGO team members in Lima, together with local NGOs like PLADES, have trained multiple informal worker leaders in collective bargaining and advocacy skills; and supported local campaigns for more enabling laws and regulations.
In conclusion, each of the partners in the overall research project seeks to promote a better future for the working poor in the informal economy. The Rockefeller Foundation, through its Inclusive Economies goal, seeks to promote an enabling environment for the working poor. Practical Action seeks to promote technology justice - fair access to appropriate technology -for the working poor. And the WIEGO network seeks to empower the working poor through organization to demand an enabling environment. These three goals - inclusive economies, technology justice, and empowerment of the working poor - are mutually reinforcing: each is necessary but not sufficient without the other two. Promoted jointly, through this research project and beyond, these interrelated goals promise a better future for the working poor in the informal economy. But this will also require a change in mainstream assumptions about the informal economy: notably, that most informal workers are not plucky entrepreneurs trying to avoid taxes and regulations or deal in illegal goods and services but working poor trying to earn a living against great odds.
Harris, John C. 2014. "The Confounding Influence of Urban Informality on Innovation and Production Specialisation in Production Clusters: Evidence from Nairobi". African Journal of Science, Technology, Innovation and Development Vol. 6.6: 529-539.
Then ask them if they see any patterns in the answers, and ask them if they would arrange the cards in a way that makes sense. They can use whatever logic they like.
This tool is intended to produce a list of technologies in the sector that are changing. This can include both new technologies that are being introduced and existing technologies that are changing somehow. The exercise should generate a discussion of how participants see things changing in their sector.
(III) under the "Ranking" column, the second most important gets two (II) and the third most important gets one (I). Each participant should vote, and should use all three votes. Once each participant has voted, all the strokes are added up and the technology with the most strokes gets a number 1, the technology with the second most gets 2 and third most gets 3 under the "Priority" column.
Once the group has ranked the technologies, participants are asked to consider the top ranked technology and draw a diagram of its impacts on livelihoods, and the ways in which workers respond to those impacts. Impacts of the technology go on the left side of the diagram and responses on the right. Again all focus group members are asked to contribute and the result should reflect consensus among the group members. As in all tools the note taker should be writing down direct quotes from the discussion among the group.
The facilitator shifts the focus of the discussion to the city-wide transport system, the energy/power system (electrical grid), and the waste management system. Participants are asked to discuss which has the biggest impact (and second biggest, and third biggest) on livelihoods in their sector and whether that impact is very positive (+++), somewhat positive (++), a little positive (+), a little negative (-), somewhat negative (--), or very negative (---) OR a mix of positive and negative (+/-). The idea is to generate and record a discussion of how these broader technological systems feed into the work process and how any changes in them (e.g. the privatization of a system) are affecting workers.
Researchers should also ensure they have filled out the written information on the template (name of worker, location, activity, GPS, sheet number). To record the sheet number on the template, please follow this format: SV/01 (for the first street vendor you visited) or CW/20 (for the last construction worker you photographed). When you have completed the 4T&TA, you should have 20 completed sheets for each sector (80 workers total).
 the screen has interesting comparisons with Durban's colleagues in Ahmedabad despite the different work environment and that there is a nominal MBO presence. The significance of the similarity is therefore in the availability of work - relatively predictable income can inform decisions to acquire responsive tools for production. Informal workers' deployment of tools is therefore not necessarily an indication of their technological acumen but rather their vulnerability to attract work.
 in addition, competition for work fosters a keen understanding of the various machine's functionality and a continual awareness of emerging technology in order to maintain an innovative advantage.
 considering that many recyclers use conventional tools, there is a notable absence of the valuing of the tools eg. no visual evidence of tool boxes.
 all the traits of vulnerability collate with each other eg. appropriated, function specific, re-purposed and risk. This is contrasted with high levels of innovation and self-manufacture which suggests that this is a sector that could flourish if it wasn't victimized.
 the high level of investment is off-set by concerns for security, risk and location. This suggests that appropriate infrastructure eg. shelter and storage are another defining pathway to the investment in and deployment of enabling technology.
 the nature of the sector is such that many of the informal workers are labourers utilizing tools supplied in the employer. A notable finding is that many informal workers choose to remain in this relationship rather than up-skilling to artisan trades because the availability of work in the latter trades are erratic ie. the preference is for lesser paid but regular work. This reality suggests that research confined simply to the presence / deployment of particularly technology can mask significant underlying considerations.
 in addition, some of the tools are gender appropriate and whilst carrying significant human factor risks do facilitate greater access to male orientated work.
This is pre-requisite to invest in the technology. The home based workers in the survey are all members of a strong and effective MBO, known for worker savings and banking. These activities have resulted in loan finance that enables both supportive infrastructure [workers' homes] and capital for the technological asset. Therefore, the presence and performance of tools cannot be evaluated without recognizing the importance of organizing and responsive support structures.
 the comparative screen is seemingly counter-intuitive in that despite its low capital outlay, there is universal ownership of the tools and interviews reveal huge significance and, personal attachment to their boards. It is more than a 'tool'.
 this represents a practice that is under threat of mechanization eg. hand made production of approximately 4000 sticks / day compared to machine manufacture of approximately 1000 / hour.
 this decisiveness and dignity is in sharp contrast to the Durban waste picker eg D.RE. 15 who are harassed and not represented by an MBO. The pride, in contrast with the tattered Durban polybag is startling.
Some fresh products however cannot be handled with these techniques resulting in the retention of manual sorting and distribution.
 investment is very work specific, high cost equipment can result in the constraining of the informal workers' personal development or mobility ie. they are effectively indebted to servicing their obligations attached to acquiring the equipment. So, there are examples where technology is not necessarily the pathway to fulfilling work.
 the head-loaders fulfil a niche function handling products that are [currently] not suited to mechanization. The baskets are purposed made and the porters mitigate some of the human factor risks with simple and effective interventions eg. the 'big board' which is the use of a long timber plank used to access the trucks at the correct loading height but because of its flexibility, it absorbs some of the body impact when accepting and carrying the basket.
 this sector demonstrates the clear collation between supportive infrastructure and the resultant deployment of diverse technologies. In the Market there is shelter, security and support services eg. electricity.
 further with supportive infrastructure and its facilitation of near universal access to various work specific supporting technology, competition between workers increases and the appearance of niche equipment is evident. This reinforces the significance of supportive infrastructure and work place tenure.
 by contrast this is a sector that does not enjoy supportive infrastructure or work place tenure.
 however, within this unstable work environment, competition for custom is high resulting in workers making very careful technological choices to obtain a competitive advantage eg. an orange peeler and juice extractor to obtain maximum return from the raw material. Niche technology appears on the screen scales.
 through MBO and co-operative support structures, shared and / or supplied technology is available to enable and dignify the waste collection. This is evident in the images that capture those enjoying purpose-made equipment compared with those who are not part of this collective..
both sectors are home-based activities where informal workers provide their own workplace and infrastructure. the availability of piecework from agents provides a source of work. both sectors are members of an effective worker organization that encourages saving and banking, resulting in informal workers' access to loans.
 this is clearly reflected in the high specificity of location responsive tools and proportionately high personal investment.
 it is notable that the sector diagrams 'mirror' each other despite completely different activities. The commonality is secure workplace infrastructure and predictable management.
garment workers occupy space on a rail station concourse and street vendors have a measure of workplace security through the local government permitting system. their access to work spaces in the public domain, although tenuous, is nevertheless more secure than their colleagues in the other 2 sectors.
 the informal non-motorized transport operators provide an invaluable, 'green' service but without acknowledgement or acceptance by the local government.
 not surprisingly, the diagrams of both Durban and Lima for two vulnerable sectors are 'mirror' images.
 it is clear that workplace security is a definitive pathway to the use of or investment in enabling technology.
RD: I'm going to skirt around the question a little bit as we kick off. I think there was quite a bit of discussion around the question of disruption, and what constituted that etc. etc. That's the first kind of broad box. The second, I guess the research project as we read it, the intent, and the intent that seemed to emanate from New York was that it was going to be a whole series of apps and other high-flying stuff, as opposed to the real basics. I think the big discovery for me, and that's literally at the level of the doing the photo documentation and starting to look at it, was to see the difficulties and the struggle for people to retain ownership of their technologies. So the categories that we're covering, particularly those that were informal workers, but the transport workers etc., maybe the machine garments are a bit more stable. But I mean, those people are working in public spaces, that don't necessarily have protection, etc. So the amount of confiscation there was of their tools and technology was huge. So at that level, there was really  big learning.
been taking pictures of machines in Ahmedabad as you were in Durban. An interesting reference from the kind of colonial day kind of machines to what they are now.
RD: I think that is also interesting. We started talking yesterday, before the power cut. Really, the garment industry here is a consequence of the collapse of the garment industry. So a lot of those machines are coming onto the market as a result of that failure. So, formal businesses are getting rid of their equipment. The second level is that the formal businesses that are still in business are in a highly competitive market that demands the latest technologies much more regularly than perhaps in the past. So it is in a sense the trickle down of now feeling new technologies as a push_ as I'm reading it from the demands of the garment industry which is now talking about very fancy over-locking systems, etc., etc. So, there are a lot of interesting anecdotes about how people access these machinesthere are almost like spotters in these formal businesses who are getting a sense that their boss is going to change all the machines and there could be an opportunity for you to get a new machine.
RD: Corrects to equip themselves when maybe they might not have been able to equip themselves. Of course, the challenge sitting around that end of the technology, from the example that I gave you about the self-made carts, is that  being an informal worker, and having valuable and vulnerable technology means that your accommodation is critical. So to be in a public space with some of this technology is a real challenge. So the provision of infrastructure that supports your acquisition of this technology becomes another link in the chain. So unless you've got protection from the elements, unless you can lock it up safely, unless you've got somewhere where you can cut and sew and you've got electricity, you are not able to enjoy your access to that new technology.
RD: They can be defining, yea. So, my belief, just at the vending level, which would exemplify what you have referred to, is that if someone  they will only sell fresh produce and fruit if they do not have protection from the elements, because if it rains it doesn't matter if your bananas get wet. But you will only start selling higher value electrical goods if you've got security, etc., etc. So the provision of infrastructure, I have absolutely no doubt, is a defining pathway for the uptake and use of higher-order technology, however you want to define that.
RD: One is tempted to say that more pervasive use of electricity would be useful. However, we know that we have unstable supply, and also it's expensive. The obvious people that would want to use it are people that cook; however they are very unlikely to cook with that technology because it would be expensive to have hotplates going all day -- it would be more expensive than using gas or something like that. But, there are people sell music, people who do sewing, who definitely struggle to get electricity. I think possibly the other interventions that could work would perhaps be... and this sounds kind of ironic, but we're working on projects at the moment where an incisive invention is very high-tech, but it's in the hand of people that can manage it.
So, the project is to get that amount of cardboard recognized, translated into the equivalent of trees, and get that equivalent value of trees valued from a carbon exchange point of view and to sell the potential of that carbon exchange and get income to plant trees. But of course the program would never work unless you can verify the tonnage received. So the program is in fact to insert a smart card into the process, which would be a smart card that could effectively be an ID card for recyclers who are within the program and on the back of the card would be the smart technology. So every time they weigh in their cardboard it would be swiped by the middle agent which is where the technology would be located. So the impact on the recycler would be minimal -- it would be just be as if they are carrying an ID card. But, it would be the thing that would verify the sale. In the same way that things like the dispensing of water to people who work on the street -- at the moment it's done manually and is all quite complicated, but there is high technology which is very simple at its front face, complicated on its back face, for dispensing water through coin operated systems, through mobile phones, all those sorts of things. So, you could make services more readily available through exploiting technologies, but it is the city who would be the user of the technology but the informal worker would be the beneficiary.
RD: I think it's never been presented to them. So, my challenge is starting to see some of the systems that are coming out of Nairobi around water dispensing, in particularly spontaneous settlements, where there is a very high level of innovation. Years ago we used it on the overnight shelter that was built in Mansfield Road, we used it for a public bath house where you  coin operated shower. So you put in R5 and you get a shower for three minutes, and it's really very simple technology. You just put a coin in. So, I think really the city hasn't really started to explore how it can be the provider of these services.
MK: In your opinion, how have technological advancements affected the ways in which informal workers, first, organize, and then also access emerging opportunities.
RD: It's really hard to say. One's tempted to say it hasn't. But the  there's a kind of a subtle proliferation of access to technology. Little cyber cafes are coming up and some people have got data on their phone and they're able to make those connections. I tend to think though that where the big differences are coming would be where groups of workers are supported with access to that technology from somewhere else. So one example that comes to mind would be this one agricultural group where they've developed an app which allows people to get into an alert as to when would be an appropriate time to bring your product to market. I've got a whole field of cabbages, when they're about to be ready I send in information that I'm ready for harvesting, and then this app finds gaps in the supply of cabbages and you actually get an alert as to bring yours tomorrow. So the advantage there of course is that you get a better price- you don't bring your cabbages in the same day you brought your cabbages, and there is a better price. But I'm tending to think that's an attribute that's actually brought in from the outside. Definitely money, banking on phones  that's definitely a defining thing. Even if people aren't actually paying for transactions here they're actually able to send money as a result of transactions. The herb market uses technology hugely. You can order products from Cape Town and have them delivered to you through the taxi network. So definitely just sheer communication. I've done research out in Underberg, definitely the people who sell there have their suppliers all based in Pietermaritzburg and places like that and they have goods delivered to them as a result of them using communications.
RD: Definitely the cost. Cost of the networks the network costs definitely. There are going to be generational barriers just in terms of accessings understanding the technology. But then it's a very communal environment, so if you can't read a screen on your phone or understand what's going on there is someone that you turn to help you. I think it is also a market that doesn't or can't afford the latest technology. So it tends to be a beneficiary market of other people's cast off technologies. So I think we are probably now starting to enters I mean we are probably now into the third generation of smart phones, so those first entry-level, first generation, are probably now coming onto the streets. The datas data is still quite expensive, and until we can get an environments I see Cell C is starting to do it, where you can carry over 'so-called' unused data from month to month, until that starts to happen it's just a huge investment. How can you actually predict how much data you are going to use in a month unless you are a pervasive consumer of the data.
ways in which you can actually distribute it. So, yes there are impediments to distributing electricity in public spaces -- it's really the value of the infrastructure that you're laying out there and the alternate value that's seen in it. So to steal the wires to sell them is probably more valuable than_ or seen to be more valuable than the person who is consuming the electricity.
RD: Well, their voices aren't heard in it at all. The irony is that   they at this point in time are the key beneficiaries of a transport system that has maximum friction within it. A mini-bus taxi can take you anywhere you want- it's pervasive. It stops, starts, waits for passengers, takes passengers short distances, long distances -- all the dynamics locked up inside taxi transport works to the benefit of the informal workers. To position themselves near the system to sell to  to sell goods to them, be those goods coming, going to a township, going to a rural area, it is just absolutely interlocked. That is not where transport technology is going. Transport technology is going to mass-transport systems, it is going to a frictionless system. And so transport planners don't want a whole lot of people  that system, getting in the way and slowing it all up. They also, in my estimation don't seem to see  even if you are going to allow some friction on it, the connection at the nodes that are on that mass transport system as being opportunities for economic development and for the location of small scale economic exchanges. So, I, so their voices are definitely not  well they're not in the thinking, and definitely their voices aren't being heard, or the people actually aren't understanding the dynamics. So that in Durban is going to have a huge, huge impact -- bringing the BRT into the city is going to be massive. We've managed to do some design work in a KwaMashu node where we were hopeful that we might be able to get a market constructed at one of the BRT stations, and that .
image, put it into a night-time view, so now it's just a slight glass, crystal thing sitting on the side of the highway, highway 95, 93, at 9 o'clock at night. Every good that gets off, and you now have got to walk home from this thing. Imagine how many paces you're going to take outside the glass box.' It's crazy. So, I don't think there is a realization just what that impact is going to be. We are also hearing, because of our experience here, but I'm seeing it when I go to Latin America, to Lima and places like that, and I'm hearing it when I talk to people from Ahmedabad. That the system is also not geared for informal workers to use. So whereas you would use the public transport to get your handful of goods and your baskets, and packages to your trading spot, you now can't get on this fast moving thing because either they don't allow you to bring all of your kit onto the transport, or even if they let you bring your kit on it's actually not designed to do -- so they all have fancy doors that let you through once, like the turnstiles in some of these transport systems, all your goods get caught in it. And then lastly, it actually doesn't supply the network that you really need. So you  so for people now to find their agents who they are doing work for, if they are doing piecework or something like that  it just doesn't serve the neighborhood districts kind of intensive  so I think transport and particularly public transport and people's voices in it is just something that South African planners have just not wrapped their heads around. They are wined and dined in Latin America, they see the Curitiba system, and they go to other Brazil examples, etc., etc. But they don't realize the context that those things come from. And those systems have fine-grained connections to them. So what they are experiencing are just the race ways that do the final connection. So I think, and you can see it, Rio, all these ones are now starting to take real strain in the sense that they are displacing a huge amount of informal workers. Yea, so it's bringing in a new urbanism which is really very insensitive. South Africa of course the irony is that it was the neglect of the Apartheid era and the complete disregard for how people would get into city centers from outlying and deliberately placed black ghettos  they left that industry for the mini bus taxis to fill as a transport system, and now the mini bus taxi has filled that gap and formed itself as an absolute bastion of immovability. They've now created something that they're not going to be able to remove easily. So, even the taxi industry now is also in itself in some respects becoming a negative force. It's starting a bit to determine who will trade where, in what spaces, and at which ranks. So, yea, public transport bad. And if you take a gendered view it gets even more complicated if you are a woman informal worker, sometimes the number of routes and trips you must do simply to get your children into daycare, you get down to a route that will get you to work and back again and to supplies  it is just so constantly scary.
cardboards and plastics that are easily diverted from the system. The technology intervention is very simple, it's just proper cards and work gear. So, the investment is minimal, but the impact would be huge. Much, much more from the point of view from dignifying the activity that they're engaged in. It will be both visual and practical, physical, in terms of its impact. So it's very minimal that you'd have to do. But the net gain would be huge. The downstream technologies, in terms of how you start to deal with that, that can be managed by itself because that starts to become a commercial enterprise which starts to have its economies of scale, etc., etc. We have not seen a lot of threats threats of incineration here yet. Elsewhere in the world that's a big problem  of incineration for energy, to create  drive turbines. And so, it's really the tradeoff, the higher water of the waste. What isn't exploited here which would be a definite thing we'd feed in is alternative energies that can be derived from waste -- particularly organic waste. And that's... starting to look at bio-gas and those sort of things. Very high, highly intensive in the sense of its management, so it's not that you put all of the muck in one end and you've got glorious power. But, the work_ the job creation that is in that proper managed system, I think ends up being beneficial all the way through. So you get the energy, you get the potential compost at the end of it, and it's all kind of labor intensive. So if you've got a source that generates it easily, e.g. a market, you've got nearby activity, a nearby source for the sale of things like the compost that would come out of it as a bi-product, and you've got a market to sell the energy  cooking. Then there could be an intersect of appropriate technology.
by-products of some of those activities into a valuable asset, particularly in South Africa that is energy deprived, then all of a sudden you start to get people's perceptions changed because now what is seemingly waste now is actually an asset. So all of the lights go out in the city, but Warwick is still burning with gas lights and everyone is cooking happily. What is going on here? It's a good place to be.
RD: Not here in South Africa, not here in Durban. Not here in South Africa is kind of a blanket statement. And the blanket statement I think is more driven by us having a really fractured, and almost non-presence of any strong membership based organizing. If it's happening it's happening at a very small scale and that scale  smaller scale, means that a lot of traditional methods of communication are still being deployed. Yes, you are seeing people subscribing to use bulk SMSing and that sort of stuff to communicate. You are probably also seeing the tools, smart phones and that sort of thing, being effectively used amongst the organizers, in terms of the primary people, the secretary general, etc., the lone person trying to pull together a whole group of people, and they are interfacing with the higher  the outside kind of organizations. But I think it's not a consequence of these technologies, it's more a consequence of just the very limited amount of organizing. But then back to my previous comment about the cost of it. If you look at it in places like Nairobi, India, it's starting to be a big, strong tool. But it's the very-entry level type thing, text message, the sending out of very basic comms [1:08:46].
Ne  Technologies: summary of how new technologies (3D printers, bio-centers, e-commerce) can be/are being used by informal workers.
City-Wide Systems: summary of evidence on how access to these systems enhances enterprises earnings and on how lack of access to these systems undermines livelihood earnings.