Sara Chamberlain is a Tech Laureate and the Head of Information Communication Technology for BBC Media Action in India. Sara is responsible for developing mobile services for base-of-the-pyramid subscribers and community health workers at scale. Sara has been at the forefront of digital communications in the development sector for 18 years, including seven years spent designing and developing mobile services in Asia, which have won a number of awards, including a GSMA social impact award, a Microsoft education award, and a Vodafone Mobile for Good award.
The alternative view is that the initial effort is the easy part (the 20%), and that localization is where the significant investment is really needed (the 80%). According to this view, adapting generic content is not just a matter of simple translation, it has to accommodate different cultures, social norms, practices, and socioeconomic classes. Content also has to reflect government priorities, incentive schemes, and supply-side realities in specific locations.
The following accounts draw on the authors' experiences in developing and adapting the content of three programs: the Mobile Alliance for Maternal Action (MAMA), BBC Media Action, and mPowering Frontline Health Workers.
The alternative view is that the initial effort is the easy part (the 20%), and that localization is where the significant investment is really needed (the 80%).
Through this experience, I learned firsthand that it is helpful to start with a foundation of medically accurate age- and stage-based information, which can then be localized and translated. Our localization process involved numerous sessions with local doctors, Ghana Health Service officials, midwives, traditional birth attendants, and representatives from NGOs that serve expectant and new moms. It also included session after session of playing messages to mothers across the country while sitting with them under baobab trees to be sure the voice, background sounds, and content of the messages were exactly right. The lessons we learned doing this work planted the seeds that led me to my current position as executive director of MAMA.
In 2011, there were no nationally scaled mobile programs to generate demand for maternal and child health. MAMA sought to draw from the lessons BabyCenter learned in creating content for MOTECH, and set out to launch three country programs in places where both infant and maternal mortality and mobile phone penetration were high. MAMA created a global content intended to be accessible not only to our own country programs but also to organizations doing similar work. The team also created a robust program for measuring results and sharing what we learned across the field.
In South Africa, India, and Bangladesh, MAMA is currently focused on some of the hardest to reach women: those on the lower end of the poverty spectrum, many of whom are also illiterate and not technology savvy. The content for these women is provided via SMS, or voice, and, in South Africa, where women are more literate and data rates are lower, a mobile website that is accessible via a data-enabled handset. A partnership with Vodacom provides free access to this site for all Vodacom subscribers in South Africa.
We know that the highly localized content of our country programs is serving women on the lower end of the poverty spectrum. However, we believe that the first wave of internet.org users will be those who are somewhat less poor and some who are middle income, all of whom also need accurate, actionable health information. This spectrum of content platforms requires varied approaches to program design, different degrees of content localization, and different partnerships, but at MAMA we believe that, by offering a variety of content on various mobile platforms, we can reach more women and have a broader impact on health.
With 18 years of experience leading information and communication technologies for development initiatives, including seven years designing, developing, and managing mobile services for base-of-the-pyramid subscribers at scale in Asia, I (Sara Chamberlain) moved to India in 2011 to lead the development of mobile health services in Bihar for BBC Media Action. Over the last three and half years, BBC Media Action has launched four mobile health services in Bihar, three for CHWs and one for families. Thanks to the success of these servicesthrough which more than 240,000 unique users have played more than 16 million minutes of health content on their mobile phones during the last two yearswe now, in partnership with the government of India and the Gates Foundation, are developing a pan-India platform for three of the services.
Persuading a young mother in India that she should not give her infant water and honey before it is six months old, despite her mother-inlaw's age-old wisdom to the contrary, requires deep understanding of the power dynamics of the rural Indian family, which may be radically different from those in Ghana, for example. It also requires having creative insights into the contextually specific keys of ego, self-esteem, and devotion that might unlock that mother-inlaw's mind so she will be willing to think and act differently.
We also discovered that illiterate rural women in Bihar, many of whom are malnourished, could not comprehend and retain the same quantity and complexity of information that the better educated, economically better off women living in the capital city of Patna could understand. Thus the number of technical health messages communicated in each piece of content had to be dramatically reduced, which meant changing the service's entire messaging structure.
ucts), services, and incentives vary in India from state to state. Content creators need to think very carefUlly about the potential impact of creating demand for services that do not exist in a particular geography, particularly if the government will not be able to provide them in the foreseeable future. In a country as diverse as Indiawhere there are 22 official languages and innumerable unofficial languages and local dialects (according to the 2011 Indian census, there are 1,635 "rationalized mother tongues"), six major religions, and widely diverse cultural traditionsscaling effective mobile health behavior change communications across India is a resource-intensive task. This is particularly true in "media dark" geographies, where the homogenizing influence of television and radio are not felt.
Mobile services designed to increase the knowledge and self-efficacy of mothers, and to change attitudes, social norms, and behavior around maternal and child health, may need to communicate the same key technical health messages across the globe, but the content needs to be localized, and not just translateda process that will require science, art, and craft.
It is estimated that one billion people will never see a health worker in their life.4 In developing countries, most of those who do will head directly to a frontline health worker (FLHW), the people most citizens of developing counties go to for health services.5 Given the important role these workers play in the health sector in sub-Saharan Africa and elsewhere, it is critical to examine why so many are profoundly undertrained. Although some progress has been made, the need to scale-up quality health training significantly is urgent, particularly in rural areas. The question is whether the global health community is taking the most effective route to providing relevant and effective health training for FLHWs, or if it needs to find ways to accelerate the provision of high-quality training at scale.
Three final points figured predominantly in these interviews. First, experts largely agreed that certain features of health training content would encourage its reuse and adaptation: the original content reflects international standards of care; content is relevant to FLHWs; and content is user-friendly, featuring the use of case studies, simple language, and engaging visuals. Second, they agreed that if content were easier to find and guidelines were available on how to adapt it, more organizations might be willing to reuse resources instead of starting from scratch for each new program. Finally, there was consensus on the role donors have to play in encouraging the reuse and adaptation of content, instead of funding the development of new content project by project.
Where does this leave the 80-20 debate? Has the ratio been a useful peg on which to hang a "cost and effort" dialogue about content adaptation? By highlighting different perspectives around the content development process, perhaps it has. However, we need to move on from what is essentially a false dichotomy that fails to capture what's really involved in creating and adapting content, andequally importantin delivering that content at scale using evidence-based methodologies. The three case studies detailed in this article strongly support the need for a more nuanced approach to adapting content than the 80-20 debate can address. Sustainable change requires a layered strategy that is grounded in basic learning and training principles and an understanding of how the target audience learns, retains, and applies the knowledge. Maybe we should call it the 100 percent debate.
6. Over 40 individualshealth workers, content developers, health academics, and medical expertswill be reviewing each resource against agreed quality criteria.
10. GHMP estimates that one video in their maternal and child health series can be produced for less than $10,000. With active promotion, these videos can easily reach 100,000 providers, making cost per viewer as little as 10 cents. See http://globalhealthmedia.org/.