Fundacion Eleutera has been working on the implementation of the Zonas de Empleo y Desarrollo Economico (ZEDE, Zone for Employment and Economic Development), part of which includes creating an Internal land registry. The organization began looking for a low cost, secure, trust creating technology for land registries, and began to look Into the Blockchain space to try to find solutions that could help solve the property problem. This is how Factom and Epigraph came Into the picture.
In the long term, a robust land and property rights system backed with the proper blockchain technology will allow communities to flourish socially and economically-which can later serve as a foundation for building voting systems, shared property transactions, co-housing initiatives, peerto peer dispute resolution, and much more.
General), and a few months later, 17 errf loyees of the IP were criminally charged for abuse of ai/thorily, embezzlement of public funds, fraud, tampering of evidence and interfering with ongoing investigations  .
As the national property registry has failed to meet basic security and transparency standards for the protection of property rights it would fall upon the judiciary to make sure property rights and contracts are being effectivety protected. However, Honduras also lacks an independent and impartial judiciary. With high levels of corruption, manipulation from external forces (both political and private), and inefficient operations, the Judicial Branch has been found incapable of adequately ensuhng the defense of property rights and the legal execution of contracts.
With one of the lowest scores for the property rights subcategory the Index concludes private property is weakly protected, the court system is highly inefficient, corruption extensive, end the judiciary strongly influenced by ether branches of government The resolution of disputed cases can take years, laws and practices regarding real estate differ substantially from those in more developed countries, and fraudulent deeds and titles are common As such, the Rule of Law" category gets the lowest score In the freedom Index.
The main obstacles for property rights protections in Honduras are found within the legal system itself both in its legislation and in its institutions, such as the judiciary. Without a properly working legal system property rights will continue to suffer and so will the vast majority of Hondurans living below the poverty line Creating a steady, unchanging, reliable registry for land titles and other registries, would ease one of the key burdens on the troubled legal system.
As the ZEDEs may have their own Public Administration, Fundacion Eleutera thought of the necessity of establishing a more secure and transparent Property Registry system which would be most apt at protecting property rights within the ZEDE. As the popularity of Bitcoin grew, so did the idea of using its underlying technology, known as the blockchah, as a secure foundation for applications in finance and law.
Since the ZEDEs are in the process of being newly created, we thought the ideas and applications developed in the blockchain space could be more easily implemented in the 'greenfield* offered by the ZEDEs. without having to change exbting national processes and manage historical data points The blockchain based registries, presented a low cost, modern and safe solution to provide protection and security for several kinds of contracts, titles, land deeds and other relevant documents, without the risk of them being manipulated by public officials or third parties during and after registration.
represents one of the best opportunities to implement and execute new blockchain technologies The legal regime within a ZEDE will allow it to become a very competitive area for businesses and we envision it as a regional center for the creation and registration of corporate strjctures which can then operate (or estabibh subsidiaries who do] in the res*, of Honduras or in other countries, in a manner similar to the States of Delaware and Nevada in the United States, Panama In Latin America or Isle of Man in the Great Britain.
In Jdrijdiy2015, Peter Kilby dtid Malt Regan lioin FdUorn/Epiyiaph viailed Honduras and met with government officials at the Presidential Palace and the Property Institute and discussed the Honduran Land Administration Program, known by its Spanish acronym (PATH) The visit allowed those that could develop the technology to gel a first hand at the current system Its strengths and weakness, and howto begin conceptual zing how blockchain could help. The most urgent weakness that was detected was that there were no backups for the physical land title records of the Property Institute Land registry books dated Into the 18$0's, making all of the land wealth stored in those books vulnerable to arson, theft, or misuse.
Soon negotiations to implement a blockchain land registry pilot program began, and the news reached several media outlets By May 2015 Reuters reported that Honduras had agreed to use Factom s blockchain technology to strengthen its Property Registry system and illustrated the difficuH economic conditions and widespread corruption the nation is facing The Honduran Project was mentioned alongside blockchain ventures made Into the burgeoning f n-tech space by UBS, Barclays, ING, Goldman Sachs and BNY Mellon.
Factom is an irreversible publishing enghe-write once, never erase. Applications can use Factom to secure data by publishing encrypted data or a cryptographically unique fingerprint of the data to Factom's immutable, distributed ledger Land and Property administration involves a wide array of documents and supporting data. By secuhng this data in the blockchain Factom ensures that it will be preserved and will not be changed once recorded, establishing "Proof of Existence" Further, and Just as critical to the overall trustworthiness of the registry, publishing cryptographic hashes during each step of an instrument's recording process provides an irrefutable 'Proof of Process ", protecting that what is submitted for recordation b what b actually recorded.
catling down development, deployment and implementation costs drastically As the number of customers served increases, the more the software can improve A SaaS model presents an opportunity to standardize best practices across different customer bases. Both customers and service provider will be able to learn from the ecosystem Features developed for one service region can be shared with other regions. Shared software features lower the cost of deployment for every customer group Upfront hardware costs with respect to system servers and service delivery infrastructure is greatly reduced in using a SaaS delivery model Both the service provider and customers 'rent' infrastructure on a consumption basis, covering costs transaction a liy as resources are used Dramaticalty different from the traditional model pursued by the PATH program with roughly a S100 million in sunk costs for servers data centers, software license fees, and software consultants throughout the duration of the project These 'Sunk costs* no longer need to be at the magnitude of projects in the past Almost 90% of the typical sunk costs are either eradicated or converted to variable costs over a long time horizon. A SaaS model ultimately makes the latest technologies more accessible than ever.
Our solution has to be pragmatic about the nature of infrastructure and resources available in developing countries, in this case Honduras, and b thus mobile focused. Designing native support for mobile devices allows us to serve regions that might not have access to typical data infrastructure Most of our solution is accessible over mobile networks and srrart devices Data can be captured at the point of entry Information can be made available to the end user easily with mobile enabled sen/ices.
Land titling and greater access to credit nave been identified as key ingredients to empower people in developing nations)11) Peruvian economist Hernando de Soto has explained for many years, that land .itling reforms significantly benefit the poor, enabling "such opportunities as access to credit, the establishment of systems of identification, the creation of systems for credit and insurance information the provision for housing and infrastructure, the issue of shares, the mortgage of property and a host of other economic activities that drive a modern market economy.(12]' And in his 1999 work. Development as Freedom Nobel laureate Amartya Sen pointed out that one of the most important aspects of development is freedom of opportunity, a vital part of which is access to capital and creditf13).
Property rights are the basis of natural rights theory, which h turn is the basis for modem human rights doctrine. Private property rights are the rights of humans to use specified goods and to exchange them By securing individuals with a personal and inviolable margin of action they become empowered and able to push their society towards securing greater political freedom.
Murray, I (2016) Real Goals to Empower the Developing World Alternatives to the U.N. s Agenda for Sustainable Development Washington D C : Competitive Enterprise Institute.
Soto, H D (2000). The Mystery of Capital: Why Capitalism Triumphs in the kYesf and fails Everywhere Else New York Basic Books.
[2] Coma-Cunill, R, & Dellon, M (2008) Slashing the time to register property from 1$ months to 15 days Doing Business.
[6] Ministeho Publico acusa a 17 personas per corrupcion en el IP (10 de junlo de 2015) Diano El Hsraldo.
[10) United States Agency for International Development (USAID). (2011) Property Rights and Resource Governance: Honduras. Washington D.C.: USAID.