The so-oalled sharing economy, which has given rise to new forms of self-employment such as Airbnb and Uber, may make available new income streams for some sectors. But there is nothing in the nature of these services that will draw those who work in these activities into the formal sector, absent government regulation of these services.
By the 1980s, the urban labor force working in the formal sector had declined to 59.8 percent. By 1985, it had dropped to 53.1 percent, and by 1998 to just 42.1 percent.  At the same time, employment in small firms and self-employment increased sharply throughout the region, indicating both a shift from formal sector employment to self-employment in the informal sector, and the increased reliance of large firms on outsourcing and subcontracting to small enterprises that generally operate under informal conditions.
Furthermore, research has shown that the informal sector is now functionally integrated into the formal sector through a variety of mechanisms and relationships. Enterprises in the formal sector draw on informal-sector activity for a wide variety of services. Moreover, an increasing portion of what was formal-sector work has been contracted out to small and generally unregulated businesses or to individuals on a piecemeal and informal basis. It's a mistake, therefore, to seethe informal sector as lacking market integration. Rather, this form of market integration is unregulated.
Leaving aside that most poor people in the informal sector in Latin America have neither cars to chauffeur people around nor comfortable housing for international travelers, these platforms are entirely unregulated in terms of employment. There is every reason to expect, for example, that maids, cooks and petty service providers drawn from the informal sector will provide the labor for Airbnb services in Latin America. Furthermore, given that hotel and taxi work arefor the most partstill regulated economic activities in terms of employment, safety, etc., a shift from hotels and taxis to Airbnb hosts and Uber drivers may actually expand rather than reduce the informal sector.