We live in a world that's connected wirelessly with almost as many cellular phone subscriptions as there are people on the planet. According to the International Telecommunication Union, there were almost 6 billion mobile phones in use worldwide in late 2011.1 The ubiquity of mobile technology offers tremendous opportunities for the healthcare industry to address one of the most pressing global challenges: making healthcare more accessible, faster, better and cheaper.
 Mobility by its very nature implies that users are always part of a network, which radically increases the variety, velocity, volume and value of information they send and receive.
Regulatory reform driven by demographic changes, such as ageing and chronic illness, is redressing the balance between public and private sector participation in healthcare. More and more, the public sector, while seeking to optimise access and quality, is looking towards the private sector for innovation and efficiency. mHealth enables both sectors in this regard, helping to improve access and quality while at the same time providing dramatic innovation and cost reduction opportunities.
Industrialisation of the healthcare sector, already in motion, and driven by technologies such as electronic medical records, remote monitoring and communication platforms, etc. is in many ways the prerequisite for the flourishing of mHealth. Patient-centric, 'care anywhere' is becoming a reality.
In recognition of these accelerating factors, PwC commissioned the Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU) to examine the current state and potential of mHealth, barriers to adoption, and opportunities for companies seeking growth in the mHealth space. The result is the following report based on surveys and interviews with key subject matter experts conducted by the EIU.
Mobile healthcare (mHealth) is "the biggest technology breakthrough of our time [being used] to address our greatest national challenge", said US Health and Human Services Secretary, Kathleen Sebelius in her keynote address at the 2011 annual mHealth Summit in the Washington, DC area. Worldwide, the technology and its promise have moved up the healthcare agenda.
Roughly one-half of patients surveyed for this report predict that mHealth will improve the convenience, cost and quality of their healthcare in the next three years (see "About the research"). Meanwhile, six in ten doctors and payers believe that its widespread adoption in their countries is inevitable in the near future. Yet most experts interviewed for this study, while also convinced that mHealth will eventually become an important part of care provision, expect that adoption will take time.
their interests. The challenge will be even greater for innovators because the improvements that mHealth can bringsuch as patient-centred care and a greater focus on preventionwill involve disruption of how healthcare is provided. To succeed, innovators must manoeuvre through culturally conservative, highly regulated and fragmented yet often monopolistic systems that often provide contradictory incentives.
Emerging markets are the trail-blazers in mHealth. Patients in these markets are much more likely to use mHealth applications or services than those in developed countries. Similarly, more emerging-market doctors offer mHealth services than colleagues in developed countries, and more payers cover these costs. The ability of these countries to leap ahead lies in the paucity of existing healthcare: there is greater demand for change and, just as important, there are fewer entrenched interests to impede the adoption of new approaches.
In addition, the research included extensive desk research and 20 in-depth interviews of senior executives from healthcare providers and payers, technology and telecommunications companies and industry organisations, as well as leading experts from academia, think-tanks and non-governmental organisations.
Meanwhile, the healthcare sector is ill-suited for modern needs. In developed countries, hospital-centric systems focus largely on acute care even while chronic conditions dominate the disease load. Population ageing will only exacerbate the challenge. Moreover, healthcare services are frequently disjointed and locked into provider-defined silos that ignore wider patient needs.
In emerging markets, the situation is both worse and more hopeful. Inadequate health infrastructure limits much of the rural population and urban poor to, at best, only the most basic care. However, rapid economic growth is driving citizens to demand more. India's government, for example, faces increasing pressure to raise healthcare spending. Jason Mann, Barclays Capital's Head of China healthcare, says that health is now a hot-button issue for that country's government too. "Its legitimacy is somewhat tied up with its ability to provide broad and inexpensive healthcare across China," he explains.
Expectations are high that mobile technology will help to increase access to care in emerging markets and transform the developed world's costly healthcare behemoths into less expensive, prevention-based and patient-focused systems. The surveys conducted for this research programme found that although patients see relatively modest change so far, large numbers expect that mHealth will have a significant impact on how care is delivered in the next three years (see chart 3). Roughly one-half predict that it will improve the convenience (52%), cost (46%) and quality (48%) of their healthcare (see chart 4). Similarly, 59% of doctors and payers believe that the widespread adoption of mHealth in their countries is inevitable in the near future.
Pilot projects around the world point to the plethora of possibilities. These range from the Patient Link programme in Tianjin, China, which gives rural patients access to medical professionals, to a host of programmes across Africa that educate the public about AIDS through SMS messages, to SmokefreeTXT in the US, which helps young Americans to give up smoking.
A broad variety of stakeholders take part in mHealth. They include patients and patient advocacy groups; healthcare professionals (doctors, nurses, and other professionals who patients see as part of normal healthcare); institutions where care is provided (hospitals, clinics and others); payers (government and private); medical device companies; biopharma companies; technology companies (devices, applications, software, infrastructure, data analytics and others); telecommunication services providers; pharmacies and other healthcare-related retail outlets; NGOs; regulators; policymakers; and a series of new entrants that include entrepreneurs and retailers.
and likely, is not simple. As with any important new technology, mHealth can enable incremental innovation improvements to existing practices, or disruptive innovationfundamental changes that alter healthcare provision. Professor Chris Taylor, Director of the University of Manchester's mHealth Innovation Centre, sees "some quick wins to be had, that will almost certainly come from the simpler, more boring things". For example, the increasingly common practice of texting appointment reminders to patients substantially reduces costs from missed attendance. These innovations have value, but they do not change the way medicine is delivered.
The patient perspective: Patients believe that mHealth offers them easier access to care and more control over their own health (see charts 5 and 6). But this would involve a substantial, disruptive move away from doctor-directed care towards a patient-as-consumer model. Clinicians would remain important, but not always the patient's first option: already, among those who use mHealth services, 59% say these have replaced some visits to doctors or nurses.
Nevertheless, it would involve disruptive change. Ozgur Turgay, Managing Director of Acibadem Mobile Health, one of Turkey's largest providers of mHealth services, calls it a revolution. "We are creating a new environment in healthcare," he says.
Doctors are nevertheless embracing some aspects of mHealth. A 2012 survey of European doctors conducted by Manhattan Research, an organisation that researches medical personnel, found that 26% owned iPads and spent over one-quarter of their professional time using them. Its survey in the US showed that in 2011 30% of surveyed doctors had an iPad, and 28% expected to buy one in the next six months. Uptake in emerging markets has also been strong. Claudio Giulliano Alves da Costa, President of the Brazilian Health Informatics Association, notes that physicians often resist adopting new information technology but, surprisingly, they have accepted tablets.
With most disruptive technologies, the early adopters tend to be those who are ill-served by existing provision or not served at all. mHealth is no exception. The two types of patients in the Economist Intelligence Unit's survey most attracted by its products and services are those with poorly managed chronic diseases and those who pay more than 30% of their household income towards healthcare. Both groups are better informed about mHealth, are much more likely to be using such applications and services already, and are noticeably more willing to pay for them (see chart 7). They are, however, also more likely to abandon these applications and services within the first six months. This suggests that greater attention to efficacy data for mHealth is urgently needednot just to improve return on investment but also to protect the potentially vulnerable from electronic quackery.
Doctors are buying into mobile technology because it can help meet some of their needs, such as monitoring patient compliance, accessing records and communicating with colleagues (see charts 8 and 9). One of the most popular medical apps, for example, is Medscape, a free service which provides the latest medical news and information about diseases and drugs. While improvement of care is a bigger driver than simple convenience, doctors hope that it will happen through streamlining, rather than re-inventing, existing systems.
A recent US trial demonstrated the impact mobile phone-based coaching and online decision support can have on diabetes patients.
WellDoc Inc., a healthcare behavioural science and technology company, has created a system of instant and longitudinal feedback and coaching driven by clinical, evidence-based guidelines and behaviour science.
Patients can enter blood glucose levels and other self-care data into their phonesboth 'feature' as well as 'smart' and receive real-time responses from 'virtual patient coach' (in the form of an expert mobile/web-client and cloud-based software system), providing assistance on managing the condition as well as more general tips on diet, exercise and other aspects of their lifestyle. The system can also produce ongoing, evidence-based reports of great use to the patients' clinicians, helping them monitor their conditions more accurately.
With an estimated $218 billion spent annually on diabetes in the US,5 there is hope that this solution could enable annual cost savings per patient of as much as US$10,000 in reduced healthcare charges and increased worker productivity. 6 7 8 In addition, this approach could allow patients to gain more control over their condition and make better decisions on a daily basis, which should enhance the lives of millions of patients who suffer from diabetes. Remote-based coaching of this kind also has considerable potential for other chronic diseases. Diabetes, obesity and hypertension are seen as the three chronic diseases with the highest potential for mobile management through the application of phones and web-based solutions.
5 Figures for the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2010) and the American Diabetes Association, 2009.
Payer perspectives: Payerswhich in our survey include private insurance companies and government entities which pay for healthcare services that they or others providecurrently occupy a middle ground. They are not so much interested in pure cost reduction as value for money. This includes a reduction in administrative burdens for patients, as well as promoting better health through greater patient involvement in care (see charts 10 and 11).
Payers are likely to shift even closer to the patient position because they will bear most of the economic consequences if healthcare systems fail to reform. Disruption is in their interest, and many are trying to redefine their roles within healthcare. This includes a greater emphasis on wellness and prevention areas where mHealth can help greatly.
Doctor resistance is likely to hold back some aspects of mHealth. This opposition is all the more problematic because mHealth will also have to overcome myriad barriers that typically delay change, especially disruptive innovation in healthcare. Still, most interviewees point to the appearance of the Internet and believe that doctors will be unable to resistespecially as payers join patients in demanding change.
Innovation in healthcareparticularly disruptive reorganisations of processes, care pathways and even job responsibilitiesis famously difficult and slow. Although mHealth has a broad range of potential uses and benefits, a common set of powerful barriers also exists. These are both diverseranging from technology to culture, from incentive structures to regulationsand mutually reinforcing.
doctors and payers list privacy and security concerns as leading barriers to greater use of mHealth, and only around half of doctors believe that the mobile Internet facilities at their workplace are reasonably secure.
Lack of interoperability between technologies is often to blame. Claudius Metze, Business Solutions Architect in the Healthcare Unit at SAP, Germany-based enterprise software company, notes that almost every healthcare customer has "many disparate systems that are hard to integrate, and where only the vendor knows the secret of how to get data out".
Culture: Technological issues fade next to the complexities of bringing about change in healthcare, however. "It is very easy from the technology point of view to say that this is the future, but [those saying so] don't take into account the traditions and the complexity of the healthcare system," says Mr Pedersen. Electronic health records, for example, have been on the cusp of revolutionising care since 1985, but in most countries they have been unable to break through these broader barriers to change.
Size and complexity: Most national health systems are both vast and fragmented. The UK's National Health System (NHS), for example, is the seventh-largest employer worldwide and Europe's biggest, but decisionmaking powers are diffuse. Ian Leslie, Professor of Computer Science at Cambridge University and an expert in mHealth in China, notes that one strategy for mHealth entrepreneurs is, as much as possible, to "avoid interacting with the humongous thing" that is the health system.
State control is particularly relevant for mHealth. Ongoing government retrenchment has created a technological gap that will slow adoption. Lack of existing technology is the biggest barrier to greater use of mHealth, according to the public-sector doctors and payers surveyed (see chart 15). One-third of public-sector doctors do not even have mobile Internet at work, compared with 14% in the private sector. Obtaining the economic benefits of mHealth will therefore require governments to invest more to catch up technologically.
For rapidly changing technologies, the problem is frequently either a regulatory voidwhich increases risk for providersor the application of inappropriate regulations from earlier technologies: 45% of payers and doctors believe that the latter is holding up mHealth.
One of the best-known mHealth services, run by Ghana-based NGO mPedigree, exemplifies the challenge in finding purely market support for mHealth innovation. The service allows consumers purchasing drugs in certain parts of Africa to text a coded number on the packaging to the service, which will either verify that the product is legitimate or warn that it is counterfeit.
More daunting still is the ability of insiders to fight innovation that they find disruptive. "With many mHealth solutions you need to understand what is in it for the person who pays your bill and, even more important, you need to understand whose toes you are stepping on, and how to turn it into a situation where everybody wins," says Axel Nemetz, Head of Vodafone mHealth Solutions. He recalls one project that clearly provided superior care for the patient at home and had the support of medical personnel. Hospital administrators, while recognising the benefits, initially sought to block the scheme because they would lose income from the resultant reduction in hospital-based services. In the end, compensation workarounds were developed in the interests of patients and other stakeholders.
Due to mobile technology, patients and clinicians in Kenya, Cameroon and Ghana can check whether drugs are fake by sending a single SMS, receiving an instant verification. An example of the many initiatives underway is the one from Orange Healthcare.
The system is a collaboration between Orange and a non-governmental organisation called m-Pedigree and is simple for users and/or clinicians. Each pack has a batch number and expiry date, along with a one-time code that is only revealed by scratching the covering ink. The code number is sent by SMS to a server, which sends an instant response verifying whether the drug is real or fake.
The costs are minimal and initial trials in Kenya have been very successful, with thousands of messages sent to the server, suggesting that such an approach has a huge potential for wider application in both emerging and mature markets. Once trials have been completed, there are plans to develop a sustainable business model with non-profit organisations, government agencies and pharmaceutical companies.
"Poison pills: Counterfeit drugs used to be a problem for poor countries. Now they threaten the rich world, too," The Economist, 2 September 2010.
Mobile healthcare solutions are being deployed more rapidly in emerging markets than in developed economies. "We see it on the ground in countries we work with. While the US thinks about dealing with fundamental issues like secure electronic health records, in places like India, China and Singapore mHealth is taking place," says Mr Dishman.
59% of emerging-market patients use at least one mHealth application or service, compared with 35% in the developed world, and among those who do not, emerging-market residents are more interested in starting (see chart 19).
I expect that mHealth applications/services will substantially reduce my overall healthcare costs in the next three years.
I expect that mHealth applications/services will improve the quality of healthcare I receive in the next three years.
Trials in India suggest that remote triage advice and health monitoring via mobile phones can bring healthcare within reach of millions of poorer rural dwellers who couldn't have reached out to tertiary care centres.
 Country-wide coverage, reaching a potential audience of 70 million, 24 hours a day and 7 days per week.
As a next step, Apollo is trialling remote analytics through a range of devices monitoring symptoms such as blood glucose count, heart rate, blood pressure and peak flow, all carried out from a patient's own home, creating a 'mobile health system' that also includes lifestyle, diet and educational support.
Over time the network will become more integrated to link health providers, payers and mobile phone suppliers with new phone customers asked to enter health records at point of purchase as a standard procedure, and a button on the phone to access the telehealth provider at a single touch. And by partnering with health insurance companies, Apollo hopes to make mHealth an integral part of the cure process and not an alternate method of care.
mHealth already has brought about substantial change in the doctor-patient relationship for 27% of emerging-market doctors (compared with 16% in developed countries) and a marked internal restructuring of their workplace for 34% (compared with 19%). Collectively, doctors and payers in emerging markets are also much more likely to recommend patients use mHealth either on their own or to let medical personnel monitor their conditions (68% to 59%). In China and India, in particular, this figure rises to eight out of ten.
Ms Mechael expects mHealth in many emerging countries to support frontline health workers before it addresses consumer wishes. Our survey reflects this: 29% of public-sector health executives in emerging markets associate the term mHealth with community health promotion or education, the third most common choice for that group.
More important, the development of mHealth in emerging-market countries can accelerate the development of ecosystems of firmsproviders, technology companies, telecoms operators, payers and othersthat analysts agree are essential for mHealth's long-term success. Given mHealth's digital nature, an ecosystem will not be restricted by national boundaries. This will eventually allow participants to support disruption in a host of markets. The future of Western healthcare may be developing in emerging markets today.
The healthcare landscapes of each country create different motives for using mHealth. Indians cover about three-quarters of their medical expenses out of their own pocket, and adequate care is beyond the financial reach of many. The country has only 0.6 doctors per 1,000 people, the vast majority of whom are concentrated in urban areas that encompass just 30% of India's 1.2 billion inhabitants. Rural residents usually receive care from accredited social health activists rather than more trained medical personnel. Given the degree to which specialists concentrate in metropolitan areas and semi-urban towns, "telemedicine and mHealth methods will have to be adopted", according to Sunderrajan Jagannathan, Head of Strategy at Siemens Healthcare India.
The drivers of mHealth in each country are thus different. For Indian respondents, the three biggest attractions are cost reduction (cited by 58%), convenience of access (55%) and ability to obtain otherwise unavailable information (40%). Convenience is the biggest consideration of British patients (49%), but this is followed by a desire to take greater control of their own health (43%). Cost reduction (25%) is far down the list.
encouragement by regulators (34%) was a leading impetus for greater use of mHealth than improved outcomes (17%).
The barriers to mHealth also reveal a telling difference in perspective. While cultural and medical attitudes are as much a problem in India as elsewhere in the world, the third-biggest barrier for British payers is that other areas need investment first.
The pervasiveness of technology is enabling the emergence of a new, more patient-centric healthcare value chain. As a result, conventional business models, which typically place consumers at the periphery, may soon no longer apply.
One needs to look no further than other industries (e.g., media, retail and travel/tourism) that provide value-add online servicesmany of which are free of chargein order to generate a competitive advantage. As in these other industries, business models that will likely get the most traction will be based on payment schemes that leverage retailers, product companies and other business partners to absorb any additional costs with minimal reliance on consumer payments.
Interoperability - interoperable with sensors and other mobile/non-mobile devices to share vast amounts of data with other applications, such as electronic health records and existing healthcare plans.
Intelligence - offer problem-solving ability to provide real-time, qualitative solutions based on existing data in order to realise productivity gains.
Outcomes - provide a return on investment in terms of cost, access and quality of care based on healthcare objectives.
But economic pressures will lead to the reconfiguration of healthcare in developed countries as well. When that happens, they will need to catch up.
Other data, however, suggest that all will not be clear sailing for the fitness and wellness market. The Pew Internet & American Life Project found that in the year ending August 2011 the increase in the number of adults in the US who had ever downloaded an mHealth app for their phones was insignificant.
High drop-out rates highlight two particular weaknesses of these apps. First, on their own they lack value. George Poste, professor at Arizona State University, says that most "are intriguing, but won't have any impact because they are not inter-operable and not actionable." Integration with healthcare systems, however, will be problematic. Prof. Chris Taylor, director of the University of Manchester's mHealth Innovation Centre, notes that "healthcare professionals don't currently treat as credible any data that are being created [through lifestyle apps]".
Patricia Mechael, executive director of the mHealth Alliance, a multi-stakeholder group seeking to advance mHealth, sees this as one of the biggest barriers in the field. The mHealth Alliance is working with its partners, including the World Health Organisation (WHO) and Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, Maryland, on the Global mHealth Initiative, to identify and promote the types of mHealth programmes that are, in fact, effective.
But these issues are not confined to health self-management apps. Such products may show some of mHealth's difficulties most clearly, but others suffer similar weaknesses: 61%o of patients surveyed by the EIU discontinued using mHealth services that allow better communication with healthcare professionals within the first six months, while 70% stopped using the devices that automatically send data to health providers.
There is good reason to be excited over mHealth. Mobile technology can enable much-needed, thoroughgoing change in healthcare systems worldwide and in turn bring significant social and economic benefits. The scope of the task ahead, though, should temper the current excitement.
Disruption is never easy, but is rarely impossible. Already mHealth is being adopted where the need is greatest and the barriers are lowest: among those who pay a large proportion of income for healthcare, among patients who are not getting effective care from existing structures and, most of all, in emerging markets.
 Find applications and services that bring concrete value to identifiable stakeholders. Someone needs to be willing to pay for change. This may be a single stakeholder or a combination of several, who come together under cost- and risk-sharing arrangements. The benefits of innovation must be clearly discernible to those who can potentially underwrite its development.
 Identify possible partners to create a greater impact and find new value. Any technology relies on an ecosystem of interconnected suppliers, creators and users. The mHealth ecosystem is only beginning to evolve, and profitable new relationships are there to be found. This evolution will also involve co-operation and co-creation between member organisations, including existing healthcare firms, new technology providers, payers, medical professionals and even patients. This will not only identify the best ways to use the new technology, but will also help to smooth its adoption.
Pages 13, 23, 27, 34  2014 PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership. All rights reserved. PwC refers to the US member firm, and may sometimes refer to the PwC network. Each member firm is a separate legal entity. Please see www.pwc.com/structure for further details. This content is for general information purposes only, and should not be used as a substitute for consultation with professional advisors.