If you would like to write for this, or any other Emerald publication, then please use our Emerald for Authors service information about how to choose which publication to write for and submission guidelines are available for all. Please visit www.emeraldinsight.com/authors for more information.
Emerald is a global publisher linking research and practice to the benefit of society. The company manages a portfolio of more than 290 journals and over 2,350 books and book series volumes, as well as providing an extensive range of online products and additional customer resources and services.
Findings - It was found that ICTs empower people, but such empowerment is not always positive for society. So, while mobile phones reduce transaction costs of informal business, this leads to their growth, as they are only a coordination technology. The empowerment that comes from broadband, meaning greater and deeper access to information and resources, can help reduce this sector of the economy and potentially improve these individuals' lives as well.
Practical implications - This study is important because of the more nuanced effect found between narrow and broadband technologies with respect to the informal economy and because of its policy implications. Given the results, governments should consider broadband as an additional tool to help individuals make the transition from the informal to the formal sector.
Originality/value - Scholars up to this point have been quite enthusiastic about the benefits of ICTs. In this paper, it was found that the effects are not always positive; a mobile does not help people move away from poverty and, in fact, supports the informal sector. It was found that only broadband can help these entrepreneurs move into the formal sector.
investment, as some of his friends in the informal sector have mobile phones, which seem to make running a business easier.
Understanding the informal sector is critical because, as the literature indicates, it reflects the economic circumstances and political conditions of a country. It is a reflection of a government's inadequate institutional arrangements, and, to a certain extent, its inability to target poverty effectively. It should be noted, nonetheless, that these activities may be technically illegal, but perhaps not because they are dangerous, entail coercion, addiction or clandestine operations that negatively affect individuals and society, but because the institutional arrangements are such that these informal operations fall outside the purview of a legal framework, which in itself may not necessarily be legitimate (Centeno and Portes, 2006). Impediments to formal entry could be laws and regulations relating to trade, labor, establishment of new firms and environmental compliance that involve significant costs to potential commercial operations, making participation in the informal economy more attractive (Portes, 1994). In other words, the costs imposed by laws and regulations, by the bureaucracy associated with them, and by personal limitations, generate such significant costs that they force entrepreneurs to start and continue operations in the informal economy.
We will use the story of Juan, introduced above, to present the literature about the informal economy and its causes, which will then be used to develop the econometric model, and we will conclude with policy recommendations.
employed by an informal entity. Curiously, he also has friends who work informally for small companies that are not part of the informal sector (ILO, 2012).
2009) , with some scholars defining these individuals as self-employed (Heemskerk, 2003; Loayza and Rigolini, 2011; Williams, 2005)[2], and others considering them as entrepreneurs (Webb et al., 2013; Webb et al., 2009) that recognize and exploit opportunities (Bygrave and Hofer, 1991). In a more broadly defined manner, they also involve, as Chen (2007) indicates, labor without labor or social protection.
Others, more skeptical about these shadow economies (Marcouiller and Young, 1995; Porta and Shleifer, 2008), find the sector to be too small, with a lack of protection of property rights, and believe that these entities and individuals undermine tax collection and negatively affect the ability of governments to provide public goods (Ihrig and Moe, 2004). In international organizations like the World Bank, the informal economy is perceived to be a problem, also because of the lack of labor protection and the perpetuation of poverty (Cling etal., 2014). There is also the suggestion that the presence of informal vendors may slow down the process of creative destruction by which small and inefficient firms are replaced by more efficient competitors, interfering with incentives for the larger firms to become more innovative (Perry etal., 2007).
At any given point, a person like Juan will need to weigh the costs and benefits of entering the formal economy, taking into consideration the time, effort and costs that this would entail in addition to his own capabilities. This is well recognized in the new institutional theory that emerged from the work of North (1990) and subsequent scholars (Clemens and Cook, 1999), who have found that institutions provide individuals with incentives they will then exploit to engage in activities that benefit or move their interests forward. In many countries, the prevailing institutional arrangements, from an individual's point of view, may make engaging in activities within the informal sector more viable.
quality and quantity of public services. These informal enterprises do not pay taxes, have little potential for growth and development, constitute unfair competition to small formal business (Rama etal., 2013) and contribute little to capital or knowledge creation. They are not under the purview of labor regulations because they are small and want to remain hidden from government scrutiny (Rama et al., 2013). These are mainly subsistence operations that keep those in the lowest strata of income levels alive. The problem of informality is exacerbated by population growth, migration from rural areas, poverty and indebtedness (Charmes, 2000).
Because he is not legally established, Juan is poorly protected by the police and the courts from crimes committed against his property, or from contract violations, and he is unable to obtain any type of business insurance (Loayza, 1997).
Some of Juan's friends who work informally for formal companies have often been abused with poor working conditions and low wages, and they fear being laid off at any moment. Laborers in the informal sector are poorly protected; they have no formal labor contracts and rarely have the opportunity to improve their skills through formal training (De Soto, 1989; Loayza, 1997; Orlando, 2001).
Given the challenges and difficulties that people face when working in the informal sector, one must ask why it is that individuals like Juan opt to work under these uncertain conditions. As Amuedo-Dorantes (2004) indicates, employment in the informal sector can be supply-led - that is, individuals opt to work in the informal economy because, given the value of their marginal income in the formal versus the informal sector, they have determined that they can make slightly higher earnings working in the informal sector.
Sadly, while informal employment may provide some means of survival, it is by no means a panacea, as the households involved are more likely to slip down into poverty even more.
Consequently, poor individuals like Juan, finding themselves in difficult, if not desperate, economic circumstances, are forced to engage in economically unproductive activities that generate a minimum survival income. The prospects for them to grow personally and professionally are minimal, unless concerted efforts are made by governments to train this segment of the labor force, as is suggested by Adams et al. (2013). The hope is thus to provide more opportunities, including education, for people, so they can find employment in the formal economy. Research on the informal sector in Africa, shows that people working in the informal sector and agriculture also have the lowest level of education. Adams et al. (2013) have shown a significant correlation between education and training, and the type of job held. The next sections of this paper present factors identified by scholars that can push people into the informal sector. We begin with the variable of interest: ICTs.
In a previous study (authors, 2013), we found that ICTs positively affected the creation of new businesses. The rationale for this relationship was that information technologies remove the barriers to entry, while also providing sector information, business skills information and access to the collective wisdom of many users willing to share their experience and expertise in any given area.
Some of these informal enterprises, however, exhibit great sophistication, enabling owners and the small group of informal employees that they work with to operate under better conditions for themselves (Amuedo-Dorantes, 2004). In that study, we considered only two technologies: cell phones and internet broadband access. We included cell phones because, in developing nations, they are the preferred mode of access to communication, although more recently, governments are beginning to realize the importance of broadband, because of the many more options (i.e. government services, education, business operations) that faster internet access can provide (OECD, 2016). (To clarify, the term cell phones in this paper refers to telephone subscriptions that provide voice communication services only). Broadband refers to subscriptions to fixed high-speed access to the internet. We recognize, nonetheless, that bandwidth on cell phones is increasing as penetration continues to growth. While these connections are, at the moment, the preferred and often the only option for broadband in developing countries, growth in mobile broadband demand will be limited by spectrum scarcity.
There have been multiple efforts by governments to try to reduce the size of the informal sector. This is because informal entities use government services but do not fully contribute to their provision. This, in turn, negatively affects the provision of more and better services, such as basic infrastructure. This leads to a vicious circle of informality and poor government services (Ihrig and Moe, 2004).
In the past five years, ICTs have developed rapidly. Some of these technologies have been implemented by governments in an effort to make their operations more efficient (Torero and Von Braun, 2006). This, we believe, will contribute positively to the reduction of the informal sector.
Regulation, nonetheless, can be intrusive and overwhelming to the point of discouraging entry or forcing employers to hire people informally so they can avoid paying the costs for labor compliance, for example (Mazumdar, 1976).
In a now-famous study by De Soto (1989), the registration of a firm in Peru was found to take 10 months and cost an estimated $1,037 in loss utilities, equivalent to 32 times the minimum monthly salary, and it included $195 for licenses and other regulatory requirements. This was later compared with two cities in Florida in the USA, where it took 3.5 h, and in New York City, where it took 4 h to register a new firm. More recent research, however, has also shown that individuals may also fail to register their operations because of ignorance about the law, rather than because of a deliberate intention to escape corruption (Lavallee and Roubaud, 2014).
Labor laws are complex pieces of legislation that regulate, among other things, the number of days of annual leave with pay, the number of days of maternity leave, social security contributions as a percentage of wages, minimum wage as a percentage of average wage and severance pay, all of which can be difficult to comply with, unless expert labor attorneys are hired to navigate the process of approvals, even under efficient government processes (Pena, 1999).
A study of the informal sector in Mexico found that street vendors participated in their own organizations to take care of problems with the government (51 per cent of respondents) and to assign and negotiate spaces for the merchants (29 per cent of respondents). These organizations emerged as a means to overcome government regulations and red tape. It is much easier for these street vendors to become members of these organizations than to try to work within the purview of government oversight (Rama, 1995).
In the presence of these alternatives, the cost of compliance in the formal sector, compared to the potential benefits obtained from joining, facilitates a person's decision to decide to become informal. As Perry et al. (2007, p. 7) indicate, "many entrants have no choice but to join the less desirable occupation in the informal sector".
For corruption to occur, one of the parties in the relationship must be able to give the other a privilege that would otherwise be difficult to get. Governments are thus one of the main sources of corruption, particularly those with big bureaucracies, because there are many activities within the purview of the state - in the form of licenses, permissions, contracts and so forth - directly controlled by a few powerful individuals in government.
At the time when Juan was trying to expand his informal business, he also became aware of the taxes that he would have to pay to formally register his business. This is not surprising; there is evidence that an informal sector emerges when there are excessive taxes (Loayza, 1997). Taxes are an important source of income for governments, and given a lack of resources to enforce tax returns for individuals, companies become easy targets for extracting tax income. In developed countries, in 1993, the tax income from corporations amounted to only 7.6 per cent, which is almost a third of the tax rate that prevailed in developing economies, which was approximately 17.8 per cent (Burgess and Stern, 1993). This problem is exacerbated when a comparatively smaller corporate sector has to make up for unpaid taxes on the part of the informal economy, leading to higher taxes than in developed nations. It is thus not surprising to find that countries that experience high participation in the informal economy also experience high tax evasion (Schneider and Enste, 2000; Silvani and Brondolo, 1993).
Juan has heard from his friends that they have used the internet to get merchandise because they can find the cheapest outlets, and they can communicate with friends in other markets where the merchandise also is sold. Juan has not taken advantage of these technologies, but is curious about them.
Gerxhani and Van de Werfhorst (2013) explored the connection between education and the informal sector. They found that education heightens the population's civic commitment, which may lead them to morally refuse to participate in the informal sector.
Rogers' (1983) diffusion of innovations theory includes education as one of the factors that leads to technology adoption. Better-educated populations are quicker to adopt new technology than those with less education (Mintrom and Vergari, 1998). Similarly, Kelly and Petrazzini (1997) found that academic institutions play an important role in the diffusion of the internet because they are among the first to be connected (Evers etal., 2005). A study by Maurizio (2014) found a significant correlation between informality and education. Workers in the informal economy have, on average, a lower level of education than their formal counterparts.
At this point, it is unclear which ICTs will have the greatest impact on the reduction of the informal economy. Assuming that the internet is key to moving individuals away from the informal sector, its adoption might depend on a population having a fairly high level of education, unlike the adoption of cell phones, which require no education and which street vendors may prefer (Dasgupta, 2001).
Using data from the World Bank and other international organizations, we constructed a panel data set with 171 countries over a five-year period from 2007 to 2011 (see the description of variables and sources in Appendix). It should be noted that macro-economic data are imperfect. While international organizations like the World Bank, the ITU and other United Nations organizations have tried to standardize these measurements, governments ultimately report on the data, and their definitions may not be entirely consistent across the world. However, given that there are no alternatives, scholars rely on and conduct research on the basis of these data, but country-level decisions would require additional research to adapt these imperfect macro results to their specific circumstances. In addition, one of the main challenges in doing empirical international research is the lack of complete data. Because missing variables are a common problem, scholars have devised techniques to calculate missing variables from existing ones. In this study, we used a multiple imputation technique using Stata, which has been found to be superior to other alternatives (King et al., 2001). The mathematical algorithms that are necessary for multiple imputation are now easier to use, thanks to advances in computing.
Our statistical analysis relies on the Multiple Indicators and Multiple Causes Model (MIMIC)[3] when studying the informal sector to identify its causes and to test the significance of factors that could explain its size. In setting up the model, we relied on a latent variables technique, because informality, although observable, is not easily measured; there are no records about the individuals and entities involved, and they do not want to be found. Given that the estimation of informality was jointly captured for all of the countries in the sample, we were able to use these estimations of the size of the informal sector to verify that it corresponded to estimates done by other scholars who have studied these countries (Buehn and Schneider, 2012). The model was constructed on the basis of the theories identified in the literature review.
The model assumes that the latent variable I has a high correlation with the Zindicators and also solves the problem of endogeneity between the indicators and the causal variables.
In the regression, the determinants of the informal economy were used directly as explanatory variables. The informal size was measured as a per cent of GDP per capita.
As we indicated throughout the paper, the informal sector is the result of many and different governance failures. Because ICTs are general-purpose technologies, they have been shown to have a positive effect on development. However, the results of this study reveal a difference in the manner in which phones and broadband affect the informal economy. One technology supports its growth, while the other helps reduce it. This finding is significant because governments in less-developed countries have prioritized basic (i.e. voice) mobile connectivity over broadband, particularly in universal service programs. This is a sensible approach in particular for rural areas where broadband deployment is expensive and potentially unjustified. However, in cities with much higher population densities and locales where there are greater concentrations of informal workers, investment in broadband can be justified on the basis of the benefits it can bring to the economy by enabling the re-entry of individuals into the formal economy.
Note that our analysis of ICTs points to a picture slightly different from the one most commonly put forth by ICT scholars. Specifically, cell phones and broadband access have an impact on the size of the informal sector, although they fulfill different functions. First, cell phones are indeed an enabling technology, but the amount of information that a person can obtain through them is restricted to person-to-person interactions. The sign of this coefficient on the informal sector is positive and significant, meaning that an increase in the use of cell phones also increases the size of the informal sector.
These results complement previous research on the impact of cell phones on the informal economy. A study by Molony (2008), who analyzed the impact of mobile phones on the informal construction sector in Tanzania, found that mobile phones make it easier for previous customers to locate and recommend their leader to other potential clients. Mobile phones were also found to be helpful for saving time, and money spent on traveling to communicate with suppliers, employers and clients. These are all coordination tasks. Molony also states that, at least in Tanzania, these workers lack marketing or commercial skills that the government has promised to offer.
The second technology we analyzed, broadband, has a negative and significant coefficient, showing that a greater diffusion of broadband helps to reduce the size of the informal sector. The effect is not only significant but also quite large. This provides some initial evidence of the positive effects that access to broadband can have on disadvantaged populations. Unlike cell phone technology, which appears to impact only business operations by reducing transaction costs, broadband gives people access to many more resources that can give them the means to find alternative employment options. These results are consistent with those of other studies that have shown that broadband allows individuals to acquire skills that can make them better prepared for the knowledge economy (Qiang and Rossotto, 2009). In the USA, communities that adopted broadband were found to experience faster growth in employment, in the number of businesses, and in businesses in the IT sector. One could even argue that newly emerging portals like Uber, Airbnb and, more important, TaskRabbit can help governments collect taxes from individuals who used to avoid tax payments because they sold their wares through friends, family and street customers.
The model included other variables, all of which have been found to contribute to the existence of the informal economy. Of the variables that were significant, one the most influential was taxes collected by the government. Every time the government increases its tax revenues, the size of the informal economy increases. The model has the expected positive sign and predicts that a 1 per cent increase in tax revenue (as a per cent of gross national income) will result in a 0.068 per cent increase in the size of the informal economy.
bureaucracy, shows that, indeed, the higher the cost of doing business, the larger the informal sector. In regard to bureaucracies, as represented by the procedures (or cost) to start a business, we found that a 1 per cent increase in the cost to start a business will result in a 0.052 per cent increase in the informal sector (as a per cent of GDP per capita). If we think about the manner in which governments evolve, we are likely to find that procedures evolve, and their history or rationale fades, leading to the creation of bureaucracies, which, in turn, can lead to the prevalence of inefficiencies that open opportunities for corruption, all of which contribute to and further exacerbate the problem of informality. In this case, corruption is also a significant factor leading to an increase in the informal sector. If the corruption index goes up, the size of the informal sector increases significantly as well.
Finally, in regard to the outcome variables, we found that the informal economy affects GDP per capita positively, which is not surprising, because the income that these individuals generate from their informal operations gets spent in the formal economy. The model also shows that both infrastructure and human development are positively affected, but the degree is too small to be of great importance or concern.
The emergence of the informal economy is a complex problem that involves many economic and political variables. It is clear that the informal economy has ties with the formal economy; hence, our decision to develop a model that included GPD per capita, HDI and public infrastructure as factors that affect the size of the informal sector. It is clear that the rate of unemployment pushes people into the informal sector. An increase in the rate of unemployment leads to a great increase in the size of the informal economy. This paper proposes an analytical model, whereby taxes, bureaucratic processes and corruption negatively affect the formal sector, so that educated people are unable to find employment, and expenditure for education does not appear to have any impact on the size of the informal sector.
2. It should be noted that there are informal firms that are larger than a single individual, while there are also self-employed people who are operating in the formal economy.
Alonzo, R. (1991), "The informal sector in the Philippines", in Chickering, A.L. and Salahdine, M. (Eds), The Silent Revolution: The Informal Sector In Five Asian And Near Eastern Countries, ICS press, San Francisco, CA.
Buehn, A. and Schneider, F. (2012), "Shadow economies around the world: novel insights, accepted knowledge, and new estimates", InternationalTaxandPublicFinance, Vol. 19 No. 1, pp. 139-171.
Bygrave, W.D. and Hofer, C.W. (1991), "Theorizing about entrepreneurship", Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, Vol. 16 No. 2, pp. 13-22.
CCYT & Fedesarrollo (2013), El Papel De Las Tic En El Desarrollo De La Pequena Empresa: Reflexiones De Polftica a La Luz Del Caso Colombiano, CCYT, & Fedesarrollo.
Chickering, A.L. and Salahdine, M. (1991), The Silent Revolution: The Informal Sector in Five Asian and Near Eastern Countries, ICS Press, San Francisco, CA.
Cling, J.-P., Lagree, S., Razafindrakoto, M. and Roubaud, F. (2014), The Informal Economy in Developing Countries, Routledge, New York, NY.
Dobson, S. and Ramlogan-Dobson, C. (2012), "Inequality, corruption and the informal sector", EconomicsLetters, Vol. 115 No. 1, pp. 104-107. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.econlet.2011.11.034.
Evers, H.D., Gerke, S. and Schweisshelm, R. (2005), "Knowledge as a factor of production: Southeast Asia's transition towards a knowledge society", Soziale Welt-Zeitschrift Fur Sozialwissenschaftliche Forschuna IJnd Praxis. Vol. 56 No. 1, pp. 39-52.
Frey and Weck-Hanneman (1984), "The hidden economy as 'unobserved variable'", European Economic Review. Vol. 26, pp. 33-53.
Gerxhani, K. and Van de Werfhorst, H.G. (2013), "The effect of education on informal sector participation in a post-communist country", European Sociological Review. Vol. 29 No. 3, pp. 464-476. doi: 10.1093/esr/jcr087.
Guasch, J.L. and Hahn, R.W. (1999), "The costs and benefits of regulation: implications for developing countries", The World Bank Research Observer. Vol. 14 No. 1, pp. 137-158. doi: 10.1093/wbro/ 14.1.137.
Ihrig, J. and Moe, K.S. (2004), "Lurking in the shadows: the informal sector and government policy", Journal of Development Economics. Vol. 73 No. 2, pp. 541-557.
Johnson, S., Kaufmann, D. and Zoido-Lobaton, P. (1998), "Regulatory discretion and the unofficial economy", The American Economic Review, Vol. 88 No. 2, pp. 387-392.
King, G., Honaker, J., Joseph, A. and Scheve, K. (2001), "Analyzing incomplete political science data: an alternative algorithm for multiple imputation", American Poiiticai Science Review, Vol. 95 No. 1, pp. 49-69.
Lavallee, E. and Roubaud, F. (2014), "Does corruption matter for informal sector economic performance? Microdata evidence from Sub-Saharan Africa", in Cling, J.-P., Lagree, S., Razafindrakoto, M. and Roubaud, F. (Eds), The Informal Economy in Developing Countries, Routledge, New York, NY, pp. 21-49.
Loayza, N. (1997), "The economics of the informal sector: a simple model and some empirical evidence from Latin America", Policy Research Working Paper, Vol. 45, pp. 129-162.
Maloney, W.F. (1999), "Does informality imply segmentation in urban labor markets? Evidence from sectoral transitions in Mexico", The World Bank Economic Review, Vol. 13 No. 2, pp. 275-302.
Maurizio, R. (2014), "Labor informality and poverty in Latin America: the case of Argentina, Brazil, Chile and Peru", in Cling, J.-P., Lagree, S., Razafindrakoto, M. and Roubaud, F. (Eds), The Informal Economy in Developing Countries, Routledge, New York, NY, pp. 21-49.
Mintrom, M. and Vergari, S. (1998), "Policy networks and innovation diffusion: the case of state education reforms",  ieJournalofofitics, Vol. 60 No. 1, p. 126.
Mondragon-Velez, C. and Pena, X. (2010), "Business ownership and self-employment in developing economies: the Colombian case", International Differences in Entrepreneurship. University of Chicago Press, pp. 89-127.
Pena, S. (1999), "Informal markets: street vendors in Mexico City", Habitat International, Vol. 23 No. 3, pp. 363-372, doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0197-3975(99)00012-0.
Rama, M. (1995), "Do labour market policies and institutions matter? The adjustment experience in Latin America and the Caribbean", Labour, Vol. 9, pp. S243-S268.
Vuletin, G.J., Vuletin, G.J. and International Monetary Fund (2008), Measuring the Informal Economy in Latin America and the Caribbean, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Webb, J.W., Tihanyi, L., Ireland, R.D. and Sirmon, D.G. (2009), "You say illegal, I say legitimate: entrepreneurship in the informal economy", The Academy of Management Review, Vol. 34 No. 3, pp. 492-510. doi: 10.5465/AMR.2009.40632826.