Over the last 20 years, the prevalence of chronic or non-communicable diseases (chronic disease) in Mexico, a country with a population of 122 million, has increased rapidly (Figure 1). The growing prevalence of chronic diseases spans all levels of society and is increasing rapidly among the poor. The Mexican health system is struggling to effectively adapt to the new disease burden facing the nation. Health care spending represents approximately six percent of GDP and is divided near equally between the public and private sector.
The second is a social protection system operated through the National System for Social Protection in Health (or Seguro Popular), is for Mexicans who would otherwise be uninsured. These individuals are non-salaried workers who are employed in the informal economy sector amounting to approximately 60 percent of all workers in Mexico (30 million individuals), although the population includes entrepreneurs and those who are self-employed, the majority are low-income individuals. This case study will focus on the second system or Seguro Popular.
Despite the widespread coverage of Seguro Popular, structural challenges make it difficult to deliver quality health services in an effective way. This creates deficiencies in care including inadequate access to medical rooms. While more than 80 percent of primary health clinics are located in rural areas, 78 percent of rural health clinics only have one medical room. It also results in lengthy wait times averaging over 2 hours and pharmaceutical stockouts, which is when the clinic or hospital runs out of a drug, that range from 3 to 58 percent. As a result, only 56 percent of patients receive all the medicines prescribed by the physician. Finally, there is inconsistent use of standard management procedure where six out of ten patients with diabetes do not receive a foot examination or an eye examination during a consultation.
The central tenet of CASALUD is to establish a proactive prevention strategy of chronic diseases and to improve the delivery of chronic disease management through the implementation of care innovations (Figure 2). Health care delivery extends outside the clinical setting to incorporate more family and community involvement. The program uses mHealth tools to connect households and primary care clinics. The mHealth tools enhance patient-centered care by increasing individual ownership and responsibility for health management. The CASALUD program also provides community outreach to enhance prevention and control of chronic diseases.
Stage 2: The state governments adopting the model will begin to replicate the networks throughout their state using the free license electronic health records (EHRs) and reporting softwares created by FCS. In this stage the technology platforms explained in Section 3 will be subsidized by the state government, and FCS will assist with technical support. Roll out follows a social franchise model since the FCS owns the EHR and reporting software, which is provided free of charge, while governments support regular operations plus some of the technologies proposed as part of the model.
CASALUD proposes a new approach in health care delivery using a variety of technology-based tools to support better diabetes care in Mexico (see Appendix 1). There are five pillars of the program: 1) proactive prevention and detection of chronic diseases; 2) evidence-based disease management; 3) supply chain improvements; 4) capacity building of health care professionals; and 5) patient engagement and mHealth.
Proactive prevention and detection of chronic diseases. The first pillar helps identify patients as healthy, at risk (or pre-disease), or diagnosed using a systematic risk assessment strategy called MIDO (Integrated Measurement for Early Detection). Such identification occurs by using systematic risk-assessment tools and other technology platforms (Appendix 1) in primary care clinics and even at the community/household level to assess risk factors and screen for a number of factors: pre-obesity and obesity, pre-hypertension and hypertension, pre-diabetes, and type 2 diabetes. Using technology as an entry point for patients, clinicians can begin disease management after diagnosis and follow up with patients over time (Figure 3).
Evidence-based disease management. This approach is supported by the chronic diseases information system (SIC), which allows data to be entered when the system is offline and uploaded later when back online. The SIC contains a set of applications called Digital Portfolio. To provide treatment to a patient with a chronic disease, clinicians use an integrated approach that aligns with government regulation and international best practices including lifestyle changes (e.g., physical activity, nutrition and diet, stress management, tools for self-monitoring), engaging social networks (e.g., peer support groups, family, and friends), and providing pharmacological treatment. Clinicians use SIC to recommend tailored lifestyle changes and the most appropriate treatment. Physicians can also use the Digital Portfolio to make informed clinical decisions.
a partnership with the Joslin Diabetes Center and the Mexican National Institute of Medical Sciences and Nutrition has created a certification of competencies in chronic disease to strengthen five key areas for disease management: detection of a problem, systematic approach, adequate decision-making, follow-up, and opportunities for prevention.
As of January 2015, there are 20 health networks undergoing care delivery reforms facilitated by the CASALUD model, covering approximately 1.3 million lives within Seguro Popular. Seguro Popular's beneficiaries above age 19 are eligible for the systematic risk assessment through technology-enabled tools for better disease management if diagnosed with a chronic disease. Any eligible patient with Seguro Popular can receive CASALUD services if the clinic they are seeking services from has adopted the program. At this time, the total network includes 103 primary care clinics, 20 specialty ambulatory care clinics, and nearly 3,000 clinicians.
CASALUD's reporting systems include validation mechanisms to analyze data quality and quantity. Up-to-date and reliable information for decision makers is available at the national, state, and clinic level; states are responsible for all data input.
CASALUD is currently using a randomized control trial to evaluate the program's effectiveness on disease outcomes and is evaluating the cost-effectiveness of the program, specifically hospital service utilization, savings to the health system, and out-of-pocket expenditures.
The Integrated Dashboard displays the continuous measurement, publication of clinical indicators and training completion by health unit and state. This provides non-monetary recognition and increased transparency. While the CASALUD technology system is an effective tool, several operational issues hamper its effectiveness. The information that clinicians input into the dashboard may be inconsistent, which makes producing accurate, comparable metrics challenging. The publication of clinical indicators and training status of health care staff is used to foster competition on quality and consistency. Clinical data is only available to clinicians and policy makers.
of implementation, under the social franchise model, states will pay for the regular operation of the clinics as well as hardware tools proposed by the model.
The patient-centered model uses innovative mHealth technology to incorporate patients as integral members of the care team. CASALUD integrates the community, families, and patients into the continuum of care through extensive outreach through technology. Technology portals are used to provide tools for patients to manage their health and disease. Such tools were not available before the program and are crucial for this shift.
Since piloting in 2008, the CASALUD program has encountered various challenges to successful implementation of the model.
Challenge 2: Patient engagement. Under this new model of patient-centered health care, patients must be engaged in their own health; however, estimates show that only 50 percent of Seguro Popular patients comply with their prescription, irrespective of disease and age. Additionally, patients with chronic diseases usually require complex medication regimens and typically, as complexity increases, patient compliance will decrease. Finally, patients usually stop taking their drugs after a certain period of time (e.g., patients with hypertension usually stop within 90 days) because they feel well. In light of these recurring challenges, patient engagement and patient self-efficacy are the greatest obstacles that CASALUD faces with implementation.
Challenge 4: Limits on Accountability in the Current Structure of the National Health Insurance (Seguro Popular). Health care under Seguro Popular is decentralized, which means that the federal government issues the regulatory framework, and state governments implement care delivery. Each individuals state is responsible for budgeting, provider contracts, collection of insurance premiums, and provision of health services. The state contracts with numerous care networks to implement Seguro Popular. Because many networks are involved and there is a lack of price transparency, there are vast differences in pricing, care delivery, and resource management across states. The number of primary care providers, nurses, and specialists vary greatly between states and there are major gaps in service allocation between urban and rural settings. There are many reports of issues such as under-spending, mismanagement, supply chain issues, and resource division differences.
A 2008 federal government regulation requires that all states allocate 20 percent of Seguro Popular toward prevention; however, this spending is at each state's discretion. Accountability and transparency measures are not enforced at the federal level to ensure adequate spending on thoughtful prevention efforts and efficient management of funding. This allocation of resources on prevention could be used to expand current CASALUD strategies, especially if funds were linked more directly to improvements in prevention.
Challenge 5: Technology Uptake. One pillar of the CASALUD model is robust information systems, and while the dashboard is an effective tool, there are also some challenges. Currently, most health records in Mexico are paper-based posing many challenges to implementing new technological systems. Although technology and connectivity are being adopted at an increasing rate, there are still many gaps. In addition, many clinicians are not adequately trained to use new technologies. CASALUD is working closely with clinicians to ensure that the transition to new technologies is smoother, but there is also a need for financial incentives to improve rates of adoption and use.
By providing robust, user-friendly analytical tools, CASALUD promotes a new care delivery culture where performance can be monitored.
The CASALUD model is transforming the Seguro Popular insurance system by incorporating cost-saving public health interventions, which include prevention efforts, screenings, and patient self-management.
Incorporate financial incentives for care quality. The current model does not reform the payment structure of Seguro Popular. CASALUD aims to focus on prevention efforts that achieve measurable improvements in chronic disease care. Process and outcome indicators are available to the public through the dashboard, and in-house information systems allow clinicians to capture data directly rather than depending on third-party sources. CASALUD also performs comparative effectiveness analysis at the state, jurisdiction, and primary clinic levels. This information not only provides incentives to help decision-makers highlight and promote better care but also empowers patients to demand better care.
The next step forward to improve the quality of care is to financially support patient-centered outcomes and coordinated care. The first step is to improve the accuracy and consistency of data entered into the dashboard. For example, in the United States many health systems have started with additional payments for accurate reporting and use of technology systems with only limited outcome dependence (e.g. shared savings only, no downside risk). This means working within the regulatory framework to update legislation to incorporate financing measures with bundled payments and additional rewards to ensure measures are reported accurately and with limited burden using tools like those in CASALUD.
Improve system transparency. Seguro Popular should increase transparency to address the differences in care provision and resource management between states. A major challenge is the resource and pricing heterogeneity between states, which can be improved through increased transparency to improve efficiency and provide appropriate cost reallocations. Transparency will also ensure that implementation is consistent for the CASALUD model in each state. All stakeholders including states and providers should have a clear idea of pricing and quality indicators.
centered model that empowers at-risk individuals and patients with chronic diseases. CASALUD should also continue engaging patients to learn about their health, understand risk factors, and engage in selfmanagement thereby demanding better health services delivery. CASALUD offers two innovative online portals that patients and caregivers can use to input personalized plans.
Advance mHealth regulations and access. mHealth is the backbone of patient self-management in the CASALUD model; it is critical that technical infrastructure and national regulations improve so that mHealth projects can reach their full potential at controlling health care costs and improving quality care access. This requires working within the existing regulatory structure to advance the current technical infrastructure and overcome access barriers. There are opportunities to form public-private partnerships with internet and cell phone providers to increase access for the broader population. In the meantime, there needs to be additional case management support provided to supplement patients who do not have internet access who are often the most vulnerable.
CASALUD is currently undergoing an ambitious systematic evaluation to generate evidence of its benefits in shifting the model of care through reengineering of processes, in improving overall quality of care, and ultimately, in improving health outcomes. This evaluation will be complemented by economic analysis to estimate its cost-effectiveness. This will help strengthen the CASALUD evidence base as the standard of primary care in Mexico based on solid evidence. Data from this evaluation will also provide essential information to understand additional barriers and challenges to adjust it accordingly. CASALUD must continue to constantly look at these processes to ensure their implementation and maintain its operation.
The immediate challenge of the national health system is to achieve the midterm performance goals established in alliance with the Ministry of Health: (1) timely detection of chronic diseases: 100 percent of the population aged 20+ years screened in three years; (2) metabolic control in people living with Diabetes Mellitus 2: 33 percent of people living with DM2 with A1c < 7 percent; (3) human capital strengthening: 90 percent of health personnel at primary clinics with a formal CME course; (4) effective monitoring of supply: 90 percent of the primary care clinics with adequate supply of drugs and lab tests.
( 1 ) Proactive prevention and detection MIDOtm Mobile Cart An all-in-one system used in the primary care setting that includes medical equipment to measure weight, height, waist circumference, blood pressure, and glucose on site. Data for risk assessment is captured in MIDOTM Information System to classify individuals by risk and provide personalized treatment options, and ensuring follow-up over time.
(2) Evidence- based disease management Chronic diseases Information System (SIC) SIC is a hybrid system aimed at standardizing healthcare protocols and ease continuous monitoring to improve quality of care. SIC processes the data through a series of algorithms to determine patient health status. All the results of measurements and lab tests, as well as the SIC's analysis are accessible to the patient's physician. With the available information the physician can then prescribe lifestyle changes and the most appropriate pharmacologic treatment, depending on factors such as years of evolution and the patient's metabolic control.
( 3 ) Continuous monitoring of supply chain 1 AbastoNET An online information system that enables clinicians and pharmacists to access standardized supply chain metrics daily; pharmacists report monthly stock levels and drugs dispensed to patients.
(5) Patient engagement MIDO Mi Salud (I Measure My Health) A multi-channel mobile phone app (for SMS and smartphones) to help patients understand their health, begin to self-monitor and interpret their own results, and change their lifestyle to prevent the onset of chronic diseases. MIDO Mi Salud enables continuous risk assessment, selfmonitoring, medicine and appointment reminders and educational messages.