The idea of the smart city is a vision of a networked urbanism. The promise is that environmental monitoring and feedback from embedded sensors everywhere will simultaneously deliver greener and more productive cities. The idea has been most fully materialised in brand new cities like Songdo in South Korea but is spreading to established urban centres like San Francisco, Amsterdam and Madrid.
But smart slums could still repeat the problematic cycle of first generation ICT4D if the technologies are dropped into communities without an effort to build the capacity of poorer citizens to use them. Many funding evaluation reports and academic studies show how ineffective the tech-led approach can be, and how it can reinforce existing divides. Moreover, the v/hole idea of monitoring, like mapping, should be approached with caution. Mapping and measurement were the original mechanisms of colonial control and projects that simply add visibility without agency risk reinforcing the status quo. It may also be that sensors and smartness paradoxically limit citizenship rather than extending it, if citizens just participate by generating data and real resource decisions ate made elsewhere. This is a dystopian version of smart slums as a way to subdue and control.
Dan McQuillan is a lecturer in creative and social computing at Goldsmiths, University o/London. Follow @danmcquillan on Twiffer.
... we have a small favour to ask. More people are reading the Guardian than ever but advertising revenues across the media ate falling fast. And unlike many news organisations, we haven't put up a paywall - we want to keep our journalism as open as we can. So you can see why we need to ask for your help. The Guardian's independent, investigative journalism takes a lot of time, money and hard work to produce. But we do it because we believe our perspective matters - because it might well be your perspective, too.
If everyone who reads our reporting, who likes it, helps to support it, our future would be much more secure.