While there are a number of obstacles to accessing legal systems, many of them are the result of barriers to communication. SMS is the world's cheapest, most ubiquitous data communications channel, in large part because it overcomes many of these barriers.8 By using simple pieces of open-source software, legal service providers could use SMS to maintain digital records, conduct basic remote intake, and improve client management, all while reducing costs at a time when every cent counts. This article is an exploration of the potential role of mobile technologies in the extension and improvement of access to the rule of law.
The foundations of the market-based approach, especially markets aimed at the bottom of the pyramid, prioritize designing or altering services to be locally affordable and useful. As governments are recognizing, dogma is not enough to compel market growth. To that end, the legal industry is undergoing a renaissance of exploration in how to make legal services cost-effective. Examples of this include unbundling traditional conceptions of representation, providing resources that support the "do-it-yourself" approach, and consensus-driven approaches to civil disputes. Although governments are gradually incorporating them into administrative and adjudicative processes, these solutions have yet to meaningfully bridge the growing divide between those with and those without access, which leaves many without access to basic social and economic protections.
The unique problems that face last-mile populations are typically driven by communications and distance, which express themselves both through cost and other resource inefficiencies. Most legal systems require a person to appear multiple times throughout the course of a process, from engaging legal representation to final disposition. For people living beyond the reach of basic infrastructure, something as simple as physically appearing before state and government bodies can be an enormous problem. This requirement, in and of itself, is responsible for a range of systemic and procedural inefficiencies. Furthermore, communicating about these appearances, which may include scheduling appointments and court hearings and gathering information, can pose difficulties in a variety of contexts.
These inefficiencies are exacerbated by the need to travel long distances, wait for service providers to be available, and engage with complex, iterative processes. For people who are unable to take time off work or leave a family in order to travel long distances, often more than once, these seemingly simple inefficiencies determine whether they are able to report a crime, register a business, or keep their home.
Legal communications, like the institutions that implement them, are not monolithic, in that they are comprised of a number of different elements. Each of these mechanisms can be disaggregated to the structural approach taken to resolve a dispute, the service providers that engage clientele, and the actual format of each interaction. In this case, "structural approach" refers to a type of legal culture or system, such as adversarial or representational. Legal service providers are the agents who act on behalf of clients, such as lawyers or community mediators. The format of legal communications, which is highly influenced by regulatory and technological context, is the way information is conveyed in legal proceedings, such as paper pleadings or in-person testimony. Each of these elements of a legal system is, at its core, a practical exchange of information between parties with different interests. The efficiency of each element, then, ultimately influences the overall function of that system. To that end, innovations in approach, service provision, and communications technology, as they relate to overcoming the barriers faced by last-mile populations, can have a disproportionate impact on last-mile populations' ability to access justice.
State-administered legal institutions have struggled to meet the needs of the populations they serve. The widespread adoption of civil and common law systems, largely a legacy of colonization, has resulted in a level of institutional and procedural formalization that often requires legal representation. In many places, neither the institution nor the population has the resources to effectively engage in formal adversarial processes. Moreover, with increasingly dense bodies of law and growing populations, the costs of legal representation have risen globally.
tive dispute resolution (ADR). ADR is a blanket term that refers to a range of processes that offer alternatives to traditional litigation, such as arbitration, mediation, and negotiation. Most ADR processes involve a neutral third party who facilitates dialogue between disputants, enabling them to participate meaningfully in the ultimate settlement of their claims. Although these processes often involve a service provider, they typically require significantly less institutional involvement than litigation. Also, because the involved parties are more able to influence the final disposition, they usually require less state involvement to enforce the outcome. While consensus-driven approaches are not new, their recognition and adoption by governments is.
In addition to moving away from formal litigation, the very concept of legal representation is changing. In adversarial systems, clients traditionally retain the services of a lawyer, who acts as their general counsel and addresses all their needs. In the retainer system, a client pays a flat fee, which acts as a credit against which the lawyer is able to bill during the term of the agreement. This model, however, functions on anticipatory costs, which requires people to have a disposable income in the absence of actual need. This cost barrier is preventative for a number of people, who have neither the resources nor the need for the constant attention of a lawyer.
Although these innovations are not complete solutions, they reflect the changing culture of formal legal systems and the growing adoption of a market-driven approach. The growing institutional recognition, especially among traditional and formalistic legal systems, of the importance of cost-effective services represents a significant step toward improving access for marginalized and last-mile populations.
The most commonly cited barrier to extending legal services into last-mile areas is cost. Although the effects of rising legal costs are heavily documented in Western systems, they are perhaps experienced most commonly in developing and underserved systems.23 In places where significant percentages of the population live at the bottom of the pyramid, or in poverty, cost-driven exclusion is less the exception than the rule. In almost all places, however, the prohibitive costs of private representation leave low-resource communities either seeking alternative mechanisms, publicly supported legal services, or ignoring the system altogether.
lives of those they are able to help, it is equally clear that subsidized legal services are no substitute for a self-sustaining, market-driven services industry.
Another way that a range of service providers, including legal aid programs, can reach out to last-mile populations is to send trained mediators, paralegals, and legal advisors into communities. Colombia's Ministry of Interior and Justice trains and certifies conciliadores en equidad (community mediators), who act as first-response mediators and referral agents. Together these programs have responded to hundreds of thousands of requests for assistance, and they are incredibly popular in the communities they serve.
When looking at the ways various legal service extension systems work, the mechanisms that appear to have the greatest impact are those that do the most to engage last-mile populations where they are. Formalized systems, and the lawyers who facilitate them, are absolutely essential for criminal and complex commercial transactions. However, alternatives to litigation, such as ADR, delivered through agents in last-mile communities show substantial promise as comparatively cost-effective ways to resolve civil, family, and land disputes.
Communicating the depth and breadth of laws as they evolve to legal service providers is a major challenge in any legal system. Governments that are interested in publicizing the legislative record face enormous challenges in terms of what medium to use. Paper records require expensive printing processes and significant transportation costs. To that end, a number of private organizations, and in some cases governments have designed prolific Web-based resources that enable users to access and search for applicable court decisions, legal frameworks, and related scholarship. These tools were initially designed as subscription services for private attorneys to improve the efficiency and depth of legal research, but an increasing number of legal information systems are being sponsored by governments.
Countries as diverse as Colombia, India, Brazil, and Malaysia have developed Web-hosted platforms that report and distribute laws as they are passed.
Some governments, particularly those supporting the do-it-yourself approach described above, support Web-hosted interfaces for administrative services and template legal forms. Both public and private organizations administer online platforms that distribute template legal documents designed for public use. A growing number of institutions have integrated the forms they use to administer basic services into Internet interfaces. As a result, populations with access to the Internet can use government services, regardless of distance and time, and without the need to engage lawyers. In the United States, government services ranging from tax departments to motor vehicle administrations and adjudication use Web interfaces that greatly expedite simple, transactional interactions. However, there are large populations within the United States that are prevented from using these platforms due to educational, financial, and infrastructural barriers.
ty of videoconferencing and have produced detailed reports about both the rules and practicalities of implementing virtual courtrooms. Videoconferencing represents another exciting way that court systems and legal processes are able to use new technologies to reduce both barriers to access and operational costs.
The effectiveness of government services is largely based on an institution's ability to communicate with other institutions and their target populations in a way that is both accessible to the masses and understandable to the common citizen. These interactions, historically based on paper records systems, are changing dramatically with the advent of new communications technologies. A number of institutions, typically those with the means and the political will to adopt technological innovations, are already seeing significant efficiency gains in processes, ranging from motor vehicle administration to multi-billion-dollar contract procurement. The institutional migration to digital and Web-based services, often referred to as e-government, represents an exciting and uncharted opportunity to both improve institutional efficiency and reach new populations, thereby improving the capacity and reach of government services.
As mobile phones become more sophisticated, the field of m4d has grown. The proliferation of smart phones, particularly in wealthier countries, and mobile Internet connections enables a wide range of interfaces, from phone-optimized websites to customized applications. As the mobile market has become more complex, the number of mobile operating systems has grown, creating fragmentation according to regional market share.38 The smart phone market, while growing explosively, is still significantly smaller than that of simpler, or feature, phones.39 What is common to almost all mobile phones is SMS, which operates in a standardized format. SMS are text-based messages that operate over a basic cell signal, meaning that they also have more geographic coverage than mobile Internet. According to some analysts, 90 percent of the world's population and 80 percent of the rural communities live in areas with access to a mobile network.40 As of the end of 2010, there were 3.8 billion mobile subscriptions in the developing world, accounting for 73 percent of the world's mobile market.41 By comparison, approximately 500 million people used their mobile phones to access the Internet worldwide, including 277 million in China.42 Put simply, SMS is the most widely available text-based technology in human history.
these efforts vary widely, a large number of m4d projects focus on adapting typical communications into structured formats that are conducive to SMS input. There are an enormous number of industrial examples of this, from large-scale mobile banking to language-education services. Perhaps more impressively, there are also a number of nonprofit and grassroots examples, ranging from medical supply inventory lists to election monitoring reports to late notices for library books. In order to facilitate mobile integration, there are a number of free and open-source tools that enable users to translate this information into more complex formats, such as maps, records systems, and surveys.
At present, mLegal is an exceptionally small and experimental field. Although there are a number of organizations building legal technologies, including mobile tools, FrontlineSMS:Legal is the only nonprofit organization developing free and open-source tools that facilitate using SMS interfaces in legal processes. As with any new system, business model, or approach, the ultimate effectiveness of the process will depend on project design, local adoption, and a range of other factors. The idea of integrating SMS into legal services is relatively new and untested, so the expected benefits are based on the efficiencies observed in analogous communication structures. mHealth, or the application of mobile technologies to health processes, is one of the more advanced branches of m4d, and so it is used here to illustrate the ways SMS can be integrated into remote service delivery.
The process of remote intake and referral takes a number of forms, depending on the organization, procedural context, and infrastructure. Perhaps the greatest distinction is whether the initial interaction is conducted by a trained agent or through a remote interface. Within legal processes, the initial interview between a service provider and a client is an exceptionally important and complex interaction. There are, however, often a number of simpler communications that precede and coordinate the initial interview, such as very basic information collection and appointment scheduling, which could be conducted remotely.
From a communications perspective, the biggest differentiator in program design is whether the intake system works through service extension agents, such as community legal advisors, or is designed to interact with the entire population. There are benefits and drawbacks to both approaches. For example, in systems where there are service extension agents, last-mile populations have the benefit of local support and the initial interactions are more in depth. Public-facing intake methods, however, are able to be automated and asynchronous, which significantly reduces the amount of human resources necessary to coordinate services and enables populations without exposure to a service extension agent to access providers.
ate service providers while reducing the cost and improving the usability of the information gathered through initial interactions.
providers, making it difficult to know whether disputants followed through on the intake or referral processes. Similarly, in order for service providers to follow up with clients, when it is possible at all, they have to place person-to-person phone calls, which can take significant chunks of time. Moreover, internal case-management systems originate from paper records, causing large amounts of duplicative data entry and lags in data availability.
In an mLegal context, legal service providers would install an SMS hub in a central location, such as a justice house or public defender's office. During the intake interview, service agents would record the client's mobile number and use SMS as an ongoing communications platform. By creating a sustained communications channel between service providers and clients, mLegal programs could enable the collection and dissemination of simple pieces of information, such as case details and simple court hearing reminders. Additionally, these communications could be automated and sent to entire groups of clients, thereby reducing the amount of time required to manage clients and important case deadlines. This set of tools would reduce the barriers to communication with last-mile clients and create digital records of these interactions, enabling service providers to view all of these exchanges in one easy-to-use interface, reducing duplicative data entry and improving information usability.
Although this article focuses largely on innovations that improve direct access to legal services for last-mile populations, the same tools also have the effect of improving internal system efficiency by digitizing records and enabling a data-driven approach to measuring outcomes. Both urban and rural service extension programs have a difficult time monitoring their caseloads and agents in the field. The same communications barriers that limit a service provider's ability to connect with last-mile clients also prevent communication with remote agents.
shown in the above figures, these systems allow one-to-many communications to organize events and trainings, which require the presence of remote agents.
These user stories are intended to be illustrative of the types of communications dynamics that characterize legal service provision and the potential gains that are possible by using free, open-source mobile technologies. As with every change-management process, the integration of mobile technologies will continue to evolve both conceptually and practically as the legal community continues to experiment with their application. What is clear from the outset, though, is that legal processes depend on communications technologies to convey simple and complex information. As these technologies evolve, legal communities stand to benefit from lowering barriers to communication and the improved efficiencies that new technologies make possible. When focusing on access issues and the last-mile populations who experience them most severely, however, the technologies and approaches that have the most impact are those built on locally available and appropriate solutions. Simple mobile interfaces for both last-mile populations and legal service providers can improve the efficiency and extension of the rule of law by using the technology already in their pockets.
The rule of law, as a set of principles and institutions, is evolving to meet the needs of the populations it is designed to serve. Among these groups, last-mile populations are some of the most difficult to engage with, which presents a range of unique challenges both in type and degree. What is clear from initial innovations, however, is that the approaches that have the greatest effect on improving access to legal institutions are those that design their services to meet last-mile populations where they are, whether in their community or on their mobile phones. In countries from India to the United States, Kenya to Colombia, and the Democratic Republic of Congo to the United Kingdom, governments are increasingly supporting a range of solutions intended to deliver legal representation in locally appropriate ways.
These solutions necessarily build on the progress of a wide range of actors and innovations, all of which will contribute to the ongoing experimentation inherent in systemic evolution. In other m4d fields, the implementation of new technologies has not only improved existing systems but spurred entirely new innovations. In mHealth, several institutions are developing cameras that enable CHWs to use mobile phones to deliver hospital-quality diagnostics for some prevalent diseases, which are delivered through a phone's multimedia message service (MMS). Similarly, the development of mobile financial transaction interfaces is increasingly enabling microfinance institutions to extend microloans into a wide range of contexts. And last year, the creation of a mobile learning curriculum resulted in more than 300,000 Bangladeshis signing up for an SMS-based English-language course. 44 As legal communities and institutions increasingly integrate mobile technologies into their work, new technologies and communities of innovation will develop complementary solutions that address pressing rule-of-law issues. In order for any of these innovations to actually improve the rule of law, however, institutions will first need to build systems that promote access to the rule of law. As mobile phones continue to reach an increasing number of last-mile populations, so do the opportunities to engage them in legal processes and services. For the four billion people who currently lack meaningful access to legal services, the case for mLegal has never been stronger.
5. "The World in Facts and Figures: 2010," International Telecommunications Union, 2010, p. 3. Available at http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/ict/material/FactsFigures2010.pdf.
12. "As the guarantor of justice, a fundamental value in a law-governed State, it must enjoy public confidence if it is to be successful in carrying out its duties." EctHR, April 26, 1995, Prager/Oberschlick v. Austria, Series A , No. 313, p. 18,  34., according to J. L. M. Gribnau, "Legitimacy of the Judiciary," Electronic Journal of Comparative Law 6, no. 4 (2002). Available at http://www.ejcl.org/64/art64-3.html.
16. Peter Harris, "Reforming English Civil Justice: A Market Strategy for Delivering Access to Justice." Presentation to The World Bank Legal Institutions Thematic Group, 2000. Available at http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTLAWJUSTINST/Resources/PeterHarrisSeminar.pdf.
24. For a thorough discussion of the relationship between legal aid programs and the rule of law in Africa, see Johann Kriegler, "Access to Justice in Africa and Beyond" In The View from the Bench: Awkward Decisions, Difficult Options in the Provision of Legal Aid, pp. 25-27.
25. An initial study suggests that while legal assistance programs produced the same outcomes as paid representation, they typically took 42 percent longer to reach. This study does not compare results for unrepresented clients in similar processes. D. James Grenier and Cassandra Wolos Pattanayak, "Randomized Evaluation in Legal Assistance: Report of a First Study. A Critical Review of the Literature, and Prospects for the Future Harvard Legal Aid Bureau," March 2011. Available at http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1708664.
27. Phil Hazlewood, "Wheels of Justice: Cutting India's Legal Backlog" The Dawn, August 7, 2010. Available at http://archives.dawn.com/archives/335.
30. "Community Legal Advisors Help Ensure Rural Citizens Have Access to Justice." The Carter Center, February 16, 2010. Available at http://blog.cartercenter.org/2010/02/16/mobile-moni-tors-in-liberia-help-ensure-rural-citizens-have-access-to-justice/.
32. M. A. C., Dizon, "Participatory Democracy and Information Communications Technology: A Legal Pluralist Perspective." European Journal of Law and Technology 1, no. 3 (2010). Available at http://ejlt.org//article/view/30/63.
34. For a brief history of videoconferencing and the legal traditions that surround it, see Matthew J. Tokson, "Virtual Confrontation: Is Videoconference Testimony by an Unavailable Witness Constitutional?" University of Chicago Law Review 74, no. 4 (2007). Available at http://ssrn.com/abstract=1249646.
44. Amy Kazmin and Maija Palmer, "Bangladeshis Rush to Learn English by Mobile." Financial Times, November 12, 2009. Available at http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/80725c2c-d06f-11de-af9c-00144feabdc0.html#axzz1Iz2NXjSv.