This phenomenon also extends to other aspects of the service industry. Temporary labor hires such as plumbers, carpenters, electricians, and masons often crowd specific markets looking for work. Prospective employers know that a trip to the local market is needed if they wish to hire someone for temporary repairs. The concept of employment agencies or online portals to survey available options is almost non-existent.
To guarantee authenticity of all workers on its portal, Sukoon undertakes painstaking checks before signing them up. An induction process ensures that applicants are cleared by the police and are proficient at their tasks. Furthermore, a community review system means that each worker is rated at the end of his or her job. If there are any complaints, he or she can be put on instant probation, with expulsion from the portal if the same complaint is received from another client.
Currently Sukoon is based in the coastal metropolis of Karachi, but has ambitious plans of expanding to other cities. "Our dream is to help support underprivileged workers and make their lives better," adds Umair.
The second startup to immerse itself in this market is Islamabad-based Fori Mazdoori. Describing itself as a "labor welfare system that aims to transform how labor workers find jobs across South Asia," the startup wants to build a social media platform for temporary hires. Their platform has been modified to work with the technology-illiterate and relies on a vast community of volunteers to register workers onto the platform.
Fori Mazdoori is at this stage not focusing on monetization and operates more as a P2P marketplace. The aim is to entice employers and workers alike, building traction, before eventually branching out into other models. The venture also received the "Best Startup Award" in the recently-held Pakistan Startup Expo, where a hundred startups bid for top prize. Clearly, it has also caught the eye of investors and professionals in the field.
Fori Mazdoori is a digital service that helps connect labour with potential employers through smartphone apps, website and SMS based services.
As a reader, I did not feel the negative impact of what was noted in the comments by the founder of Fori Mazdoori. All in all, good coverage - provides the cote essence of what is neede in such coverage, which in itself is incredible considering the teach and reputation of TIA.
Also, I feel the article does not do justice to any of our achievements, the least some other of our provided images could have been used or ever, the image used could be placed under the second heading with picture credits which are missing.