The views presented in this paper are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of ODI.
This report has been informed by a series of background papers commissioned by the authors. Moizza Binat Sarwar (ODI) provided an overview paper on the legal, policy and regulatory framework surrounding the on-demand economy and domestic work, and Emma Samman (ODI Research Associate) provided a paper focusing on relevant digital and financial divides. A country case study focusing on the South Africa context was also commissioned from Justice Alfred Mavedzenge, Sherry Tapfuma and McDonald Lewanika (independent in-country research team).
Kendra Hughes and Mike Bird (Women in Informal Employment: Globalizing and Organizing - WIEGO) and Jonathan Casey (Practical Action) for the helpful input they provided during the preparation of this paper, and to Dina Mansour-Ille, Ishbel Matheson and Elizabeth Stuart (all ODI), Nanjira Sambuli (World Wide Web Foundation) and Dr Pamhidzai H. Bamu (WIEGO) for their peer review. We also extend thanks to Nikki Lee for editorial support and to Katy Harris, Chris Little and Ben Tritton, who managed the report's production.
 Women make up 80% of the 67 million domestic workers globally. The on-demand economy for domestic work is growing rapidly in developing countries. The potential benefits and risks attached to this burgeoning area of domestic work may affect women disproportionately.
 On-demand companies have adapted to developing country contexts, notably by taking steps to engage workers by overcoming digital and financial divides.
Yet there remains a dearth of research on this emerging trend to examine whether or not the above claims are true. This working paper presents a scoping study, and a first step towards addressing that gap. It explores the rise of on-demand domestic work platforms and the experiences of households and domestic workers using them, to identify priorities for future policy, practice and research.
In addition, on-demand platforms are designed to facilitate service purchaser choice, trust and service quality assurance. This includes systems to rate and review workers, and the ability to select workers based on demographic characteristics such as age or gender. These systems disproportionately benefit purchasers, and appear to reinforce the unequal power relations and discriminatory structures underpinning the traditional domestic work sector.
The infancy of on-demand domestic work in developing countries means that it is not too late to raise standards and ensure a fair deal for domestic workers. This will involve governments ensuring policy, legal and regulatory frameworks are fit for purpose. Companies should also act by proactively designing equality, anti-discrimination and safety into platform models. Engaging domestic workers and their collectives as well as service purchasers in active dialogue to ensure the system works for all concerned will be critical for success.
On-demand platforms are emerging and growing rapidly in developing countries,1 driven by increased digital connectivity and availability of financial services, as well as an increasingly tech-savvy and affluent middle class. This includes platforms which facilitate the access of consumers to a range of care and domestic work services, such as cooking, cleaning, child and elderly care. Examples include MyDidi in India, Domestly and SweepSouth in South Africa, and Aliada in Mexico, which offer a range of cleaning, laundry and ironing services as a basic package.
market - recent reports suggest that dedicated on-demand domestic work platforms in India are expanding up to 60% month-on-month (cited in Mehta Kadakia, 2016).
The emergence of the on-demand domestic service economy is relevant across a number of areas of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Notably, it intersects with commitments focusing on decent work creation (SDG 8), health and well-being (SDG 3), poverty eradication (SDG 1) and addressing inequality (SDG 10). The cross-cutting SDG promise to 'leave no one behind' is also highly pertinent.
The global gold standard on domestic work is the International Labour Organization (ILO) Domestic Workers Convention, 2011 (No. 189) and associated Recommendation 201, which specify domestic worker rights and protections and outline the measures required of ratifying states to make decent work a reality for domestic workers.
In this working paper, we present preliminary analysis of how on-demand domestic work platforms operate in different developing country contexts, and the experiences of domestic workers and services purchasers who have engaged with them. Through research and better understanding of these issues in some of the world's developing countries, we hope to shed light on the relevance of the on-demand domestic work economy to the established global development agenda (see Box 1).
and reliable domestic services to support their work-life balance. The research also identified some potential to improve conditions in the traditional domestic work sector. For example, on-demand platforms can allow workers -the people using on-demand platforms to seek work - to track hours worked and wages earnt through the platform. This gives workers some choice over when they work, and in some cases, provides better remuneration than other forms of domestic work - particularly in comparison to live-in domestic worker wages.
In addition, large groups of workers may be excluded from any benefits the on-demand economy provides altogether -persistent gendered digital and financial divides mean that many are unable to access or use the technology through which on-demand platforms operate.
3 For instance, in South Africa, domestic work app companies SweepSouth and Domestly started in 2014 and 2015 respectively. In Mexico and the US, companies appeared earlier, including Aliada and Homejoy respectively, both of which started operations in 2012.
The operating model of gig-economy platforms can be divided into two categories: 'crowdwork' and 'on-demand economy'. Crowdwork refers to tasks commissioned and carried out virtually, via the Internet. Service purchasers advertise specific tasks on the platform, which enables the matching of the purchaser with suitably skilled crowdworkers across the world, who can complete the task for payment. In this model of work, the crowdsourcers and the crowdworker rarely experience face-to-face interaction. Perhaps the best-known global crowdwork platform is Amazon Mechanical Turk, which facilitates tasks including data collection and input, information searches and spreadsheet design.
The proliferation of on-demand platforms globally has been accompanied by increasing debate on their different implications for service purchasers and workers, and for the wider economy. A brief overview of that debate is provided in this section.
On-demand companies generally emphasise the ease of use and quick access to services, service quality control via ratings and review systems, and the affordability of services as the major benefits to service purchasers. On the worker side, proponents highlight increased access to economic opportunities as the primary benefit, with the on-demand economy effectively harnessing workers' under-utilised assets and skills. Furthermore, workers' self-employed status provides independence and flexible working schedules, allowing them to balance remunerated activity with other work, study, leisure or family-related activities, and enabling them to avoid fixed working hours by engaging in paid activities via platforms at their preferred time (Hall and Krueger, 2015; Harris and Krueger, 2015).
make on-demand work feasible and satisfying for workers (Manyika et al., 2016). This is reflective of academic literature and the increasing media coverage,4 which identifies major challenges within the on-demand economy largely relating to the conditions of workers.
The often intermittent nature of tasks offered by platforms can lead to low-income levels and poor income security, notably for those engaging in the on-demand economy with the lowest overall income-levels. A recent study found that income security and income level were the two key areas where independent gig-economy workers reported less satisfaction than traditionally employed workers. In addition, those engaging by choice reported a greater work-life satisfaction than those who do it out of necessity, which includes the 'financially strapped' (Manyika et al., 2016).
Yet a number of successful legal challenges have recently been brought by on-demand workers who dispute their classification as independent contractors, arguing that they are subject to strict terms set by the platform and are therefore working in a misclassified employment relationship, and laying claim to benefits such as a minimum wage and basic protections.5 Recent examples of such litigation include the Aslam, Farrar and Others vs Uber case in the UK (October 2016), and the Berwick vs Uber case in the US (June 2015). These appear to have paved the way for further discussion around on-demand service provider status and the associated benefits in different contexts.
Firstly, the on-demand economy relies on Internet connectivity to organise service purchasing and provision, and as such has been driven by and scaled up because of the exponential growth of the Internet in the developing world. Accurate data on Internet use is scarce, but the International Telecommunications Union (ITU) demonstrates its exponential growth in its estimates for 2016, which suggest that there were about 898 million more Internet users than in 2013 - 47.5% of the global population is now estimated to be using the Internet as illustrated in Figure 1. In the developing world, data suggests that only 4 in every 10 people use the Internet.6 Given this low threshold, the trajectory is likely to continue on an upward trend (ITU, 2016b).
mobile phone subscribers, and half of them with access to the Internet on their phones as of 2016, although usage varies markedly across and within regions (GSMA, 2016a).
Given that the on-demand economy has to date been organised predominantly through app-based platforms, it is relevant that basic phones are increasingly being supplanted by so-called feature phones7 in much of the world, as well as by smartphones - though levels of smartphone connection remain low in most developing countries. In sub-Saharan Africa (SSA), for example, only 16% of mobile connections are via smartphone (GSMA, 2015a: 32). However, in all regions, as prices of smartphones fall, their share is expected to increase dramatically - by 2020, it is predicted that they will account for most handsets in all regions (Figure 2).
7 Feature phones are handsets with one or more functions beyond voice calling and text messaging, but are not as extensive as a smartphone. These functions are: QWERTY/AZERTY keyboard, touchscreen, ability to access the internet and ability to download mobile applications (GSMA, 2015c).
A second key area concerns financial divides: payments for on-demand economy services are generally made and received through formal bank accounts, which potentially poses a significant barrier to operations in developing countries. It is estimated that about 2.5 billion people globally lack access to formal financial services, although the share of adults with a bank account has increased rapidly - by 11 percentage points since 2011 (GSMA, 2015b: 10; Demirgu -Kunt et al., 2015). The extent of account penetration varies markedly by region. Among developing regions, it is lowest in the Middle East (14%) and highest in East Asia Pacific (EAP) (69%).
A third area relates to the nature of labour markets in developing countries, as highlighted by Fanggidae et al. (2016). First, high levels of informality may mean workers in the on-demand economy transition from previously entirely unorganised, informal self-employment to a more formal, if not regular, work arrangement. Second, poor employment outcomes in the formal economy may provide incentives for workers to transition into the on-demand economy.
8 The World Wide Web Foundation conducted surveys in urban poor areas in 10 countries to assess how women are using the Internet to access work.
Unpaid care and domestic work, essential to maintaining the labour force and for human well-being, is disproportionately carried out by women family members as a result of gender and social norms (Cook and Ravazi, 2012; Hunt and Samman, 2016). However, women's increasing labour force participation, an ageing population and paid work intensification have led to an increase in occupational domestic work globally (ILO, 2010).
employed by a single household or by multiple employers, may be residing in the household of the employer (live-in worker) or may be living in his or her own residence (live-out) (Chen, 2011). They perform various household tasks which are not always be well-defined, but may include cleaning, cooking, gardening, guarding the house, and taking care of children or the elderly (ibid.; Albin and Mantouvalou, 2012).
It is difficult to precisely pinpoint the number of domestic workers globally because of difficulties in defining domestic work, variation in domestic work classifications at country level, and the hidden and informal nature of the work itself. See ILO 2010 and 2013a for further discussion.
While for some women paid domestic work offers a pathway to a sustainable income on fair terms, many workers experience severe exploitation and abuse as well as unpredictable and insecure working hours, and little influence or control over their working arrangements (Hunt and Samman, 2016). Globally, 57% of all domestic workers (29.7 million individuals) have no limitations on their working hours, and often work longer hours than the national averages, particularly in developing countries. For example, in Nepal, domestic workers worked an average of 52 hours per week even though the national average was 39 hours (ILO, 2016c).12 In addition, many domestic workers work significant periods of on-call time (ibid.).
case of Turkey), as Figure 4 demonstrates (Oelz and Rani, 2015). Low wages can be linked to the lack of working time arrangements, with earnings not tied to actual hours worked. This is particularly the case for live-in workers or when the pay is task-based and not time-based (Ibid).
This low remuneration and poor working conditions is linked to the invisibility of domestic work, which takes place in private households and often remains undocumented and informal despite formalisation efforts in a number of countries (ILO, 2010; ILO, 2013a). Domestic work is often undervalued in monetary terms as it replaces unpaid work traditionally carried out by women, which remains largely unrecognised and culturally devalued as it is not seen as adding productive economic value (for further discussion see Hunt and Samman, 2016).
11 See Oelz and Rani (2015: 7): 'In some of the countries under analysis, domestic workers largely belong to particular ethnic communities or social groups, like African Blacks in South Africa, or Scheduled Castes or Tribes in India. However, in others the composition of the workforce in the sector is much more mixed'.
13 Even where minimum wage provisions are in place, domestic workers often do not benefit. For example, many do not enjoy relevant protections in Brazil and the Netherlands because they work below the minimum wage threshold of two days per week for a single employer (ILO, 2016c).
As a result of these factors, domestic work is often not considered 'real' or regular work, which has contributed significantly to continued patchy legal and social provision.
Alongside this, the analysis explores the surrounding legal, regulatory and policy framework and the implications of digital and financial divides, as demonstrated in Figure 5.
it is likely to be indicative of how the on-demand trend may evolve in the developing world, especially in SSA.
Taken together, these factors make South Africa an interesting candidate to explore the impact of on-demand apps on the domestic work sector in-depth. While it was beyond the scope of this paper to develop a second full-country case study, secondary data from India and elsewhere provided useful comparative context. An extensive methodological description can be found in the Appendix.
It is notable, however, that some platforms clearly identify women as domestic workers, both in the female-dominated imagery on their platforms, and in language used which clearly identifies 'women' as domestic workers or uses the feminine form throughout in relevant languages, such as Spanish.16 On-demand platforms thereby mirror the gendered roles prevalent within the traditional domestic work sector. Finally, our research suggests that the on-demand economy for domestic work is linked to internal and international migration, see Box 6 (page 25).
The employment classification of domestic workers is a crucial determinant of their access to rights, protections and benefits. Ensuring the employment relationship between domestic workers and their employer is recognised is a vital means by which their work can be incrementally formalised, while also going some way to addressing the traditionally poor working conditions associated with it (ILO, 2010). To date, many domestic workers remain in informal working arrangements, or in relationships misclassified as 'selfemployment' because the reality of the working conditions correspond to those which should legally see domestic workers classified as workers or employees (depending on applicable classifications in a given jurisdiction) (ILO, 2016a).
Related to this, enforcement and accountability appears a weak point; the government is unlikely to have the capacity to chase relatively small sums from a potentially large number of workers - even if the workers can be identified and located. Furthermore, the government may be more focused on increasing economic opportunities than recouping taxes. As our informant noted, 'The government is pushing hard on online work, but they're saying "let's make the jobs first, then handle issues when they come up"'.
18 Alianda in Mexico sees the relationship between service provider and purchaser as allies. While in South Africa, Domestly sees itself changing the power asymmetry between domestic worker and purchaser through the giving authority to domestic workers to set their rates. At SweepSouth, freedoms are seen to accrue through domestic workers working when they want.
The two biggest platforms operating in South Africa, Domestly and SweepSouth, state in their terms and conditions that they are not employers or an employment service - domestic workers are engaged as an independent contractor by the purchaser.
South Africa has a relatively advanced legal framework regulating domestic work, creating minimum standards which employers of domestic workers must adhere to.+ These include provisions around minimum wage, overtime payments and limitations on working hours at the workers' discretion, minimum age, mandated work contracts with a prescribed termination process, a decent and safe working environment, and work permits for employed foreign nationals.
Yet despite the disclaimers of Domestly and SweepSouth, they could still be legally regarded as employers if they exercise control over the domestic workers. Factors which could be considered to determine the degree of control include whether or not the platform sets rates, whether or not platforms are responsible for issuing out payments to the domestic workers, and the extent to which companies dictate procedures to be adhered to during work. No litigation has been bought yet against these companies, but - as seen elsewhere in the on-demand economy - worker claims to employment rights and protections from platform companies are likely to rest on tests of this kind.
negative impacts on public social protections and services, notably on those that stand to support women's access to economic opportunities (see UN Women 2015; Hunt and Samman, 2016).
Proponents of the on-demand economy highlight its multiple benefits in terms of worker flexibility, choice and independence. Given the challenges to employment-related rights and protections inherent within the independent contractor model, in this section we explore whether providing services via platforms can confer wider benefits which may disrupt poor working conditions within the domestic work sector.
On-demand companies hold extensive insights into provider working patterns: 'systems [ ] capture whether a worker is logged on to the company network and how long they work on each task', which may have negative implications for workers' privacy (Eurofound, 2015: 77). However, in the case of domestic work, this can be a more positive aspect of on-demand platform technology given the long working hours and low attached remuneration in the traditional sector. Domestic workers participating in this study confirmed that the use of the company's mobile app meant they were able to record and precisely monitor the amount of time and money earnt for each gig, which was viewed positively.
In general, domestic workers are only paid for the time taken to carry out tasks, and as such, many platforms classify domestic workers as 'independent contractors' and purchasers as their 'clients', thereby avoiding an employment relationship and the obligations which accompany it such as paying minimum wage, overtime and social security contributions (Berg, 2016). Some, such as Domestly in South Africa, may even have invested in legal advice to ensure their terms and conditions do not constitute contract of employment.++ This is reflective of the reconceptualisation of the traditional employer-employee relationship as a technology-enabled commercial exchange which exists across the wider on-demand economy (Martin 2015).
'it gives you power to work when you want as the domestic worker once you are through [the joining procedure]'.
20 For example: 'women handle a disproportionate share of household work, child care, and care for elderly dependents, so flexible independent work helps them juggle these other responsibilities' (Manyika et al. 2016: 43). This assumption is problematic as fails to recognise or challenge women's disproportionate care load in relation to men (see Balakrishnan et al., 2016).
Though the overall level of earnings depends largely on the number of gigs the worker is hired for, platform design features also appear to play a role. Respondents working for SweepSouth and Domestly in South Africa suggest that the Domestly model - where workers can set their payment rates after having satisfactorily completed around 15 gigs - was preferable. One SweepSouth worker reported she was thinking of moving to Domestly for this reason. Respondents also stated that Domestly provides a pay rise after around 100 jobs, dependent on good ratings from purchasers, which respondents cited as a motivation to work harder. Given the low income, tips and other in-kind benefits from purchasers were seen as important. SweepSouth allows purchasers to tip via the app when they give a positive rating, although respondents reported that they were not allowed to take food or other gifts directly from purchasers which would otherwise be an important supplement to their low wages.
Overall, then, while flexibility seems to be a benefit, it is severely mitigated by insufficient and insecure income. Moreover, although earnings may be higher than a live-in domestic worker wage, the extent to which on-demand domestic work proceeds are higher than the remuneration gained by domestic workers in other (non-live-in) working arrangements remains unclear.
In sum, domestic workers report some benefits of on-demand work, particularly in comparison to some of the working practices and conditions of the traditional domestic work sector. However, significant challenges remain, which appear to be experienced by providers differently, and depending on through which platform they seek work. This suggests that company operating model and approach have significant effects on the experiences of domestic workers seeking and engaging in work through on-demand platforms.
The highly dispersed, informal and hidden nature of the domestic workforce has meant that historically, information sharing, organising and establishing collective bargaining agreements has been difficult, although domestic worker collectives and unions have been established worldwide.24 The on-demand economy for domestic work presents specific challenges and opportunities in this area.
However, it remains unclear whether most foreign nationals using platforms are already in-country prior to securing on-demand work. That gigs can be procured online makes it possible for providers to seek and secure gigs from their home countries, provided they have the Internet and have already passed any company registration procedure.
Yet the on-demand economy also offers unique potential for organising, as platforms pool together large groups of workers who may otherwise operate as isolated, self-employed individuals (Dewan and Randolph, 2016).
Our empirical evidence confirms that on-demand domestic workers are starting to organise informally and share information between themselves, though the process by which workers first establish contact remains unclear. For example, one domestic worker participant confirmed that she communicated with other workers working through the same platform via a private WhatsApp26 group, saying 'We are all going through the same struggles and we get to share on that group' (Busi). Another working with the same company reported that the group members plan in the future to approach the company to present various problems they are experiencing, including that the company had not paid them for completed work.
drivers have worked through social media and WhatsApp groups to create an informal workers' association that negotiates with the company on issues related to legal status and income, staging protests which have led to the overturning of unfavourable policies introduced by the company (Fanggidae et al., 2016).
reliability, cost and opportunity to manage work-life balance. However, existing inequalities and unequal power relations between purchasers and domestic workers are left untouched, and in some cases entrenched, by on-demand platforms. Importantly though, on-demand companies may be able to 'design-in' equality, non-discrimination and safety to overcome these significant challenges.
Challenges obtaining platform user data means it is difficult to pinpoint the exact profile of service purchasers using on-demand platforms to obtain domestic services. However, a number of key characteristics have been identified.
interviews with participants from India, Kenya and South Africa, and which was implied in literature reviewed in the Mexico context. It was reported that purchasers had previously experienced significant delay in hiring a worker, as searches for a 'suitable' individual took significant time and effort, and required being involved in informal networks of people who may refer potential workers or use placement agencies who could be unreliable or expensive. On-demand platforms facilitate the process, allowing purchasers to select a provider and purchase services 'within minutes' (Gugulethu). This was corroborated by workers interviewed in South Africa, who reported using platforms to advertise their services, as 'people no longer take maids from the streets' (group interview participants).
While low service costs are a clear advantage for purchasers, this represents a significant challenge to the workers' level of income gain from platforms. Keeping commission rates at a level sufficient to ensure company growth while simultaneously encouraging competitive service prices for purchasers and sufficient wages for workers is a considerable challenge to on-demand companies (see Box 7, overleaf). However, it is a challenge which must be tackled if on-demand domestic service provision is to become a genuinely decent work option for domestic workers.
The location in which domestic services take place - in private homes - means that purchasers often require substantial reassurance on the worker entering their home, sometimes unaccompanied. As one key informant noted, purchasers desire 'the right kind of people who would not steal - that's a huge thing; who are trustworthy' (India informant).
The reviews can be viewed on individual provider profiles on the platform and therefore inform the decision of future purchasers to select an individual provider. Consequently, they play an important role in determining workers' economic opportunities (Silberman and Irani, 2016; Martin, 2015). Moreover, these systems also expose workers to implicit or explicit discrimination, as purchaser reviews are subjective and highly likely to be subject to either explicit or implicit bias on the basis of factors such as gender, age, race or ethnicity (Rogers, 2015; Leong, 2014, Rosenblat et al., 2016; Zatz, 2016).
Aside from verifications of this kind, the platform profile system is often set up to enable purchasers to select domestic workers based on a range of preferences, including by demographic characteristics. One platform founder outlined this process, which was conducted manually by a team when the company was first founded, but then was later designed into an algorithm on the platform once the system had been tested: 'You have to be clear about who you want, say if you don't want an old man or woman but a younger person, we'll send you a younger person. So it matches your request to a list of skillset, age, gender characteristics that we have on our database' (Kenya informant).
Therefore, these systems not only maintain the unequal and discriminatory structures and relationships between purchasers and providers underpinning the traditional domestic work sector, but actively reinforce them. At the same time, this is one area which companies could potentially address in their platform design, by taking creative steps to build-in equality of opportunity, fairness and anti-discrimination, for example by focusing provider profiles only on work experience and similar job-relevant information.33 Whether providers would engage 'mystery' providers without knowledge of their personal profile, though, is another question.
Another option to protect platform users may be external apps which enable users to seek help in an emergency (see GSMA, 2015d). In India, the app 'FightBack' (available in 22 Indian states and 81 countries), when activated by a user will send a direct SOS message to pre-selected contacts, confirming the user's location using GPS coordinates (ibid.). This app requires a smartphone but similar features have been developed for feature and basic phones - for example, 'Banglalink Emergency' sends an SMS alert and the user's location to three pre-registered contacts when the user dials a short code (ibid.). Such initiatives could significantly improve the experience and safety of on-demand platform users if they were built into platform design or used in parallel with mobile apps.
Common across on-demand domestic work platforms is that services are advertised as high quality and delivered by expert professionals (although exact wording to that effect differs). This is not surprising, given that their business growth and sustainability requires attracting and maintaining a large purchaser base, and an important precursor for this is the quality of services provided to the purchaser. Service purchasers that were interviewed also confirmed that service quality was a priority factor for them. When the service was not deemed satisfactory, it called into question the quality of the service: 'I [was] left wondering whether these people are trained domestic workers or not' (Nokutenda).
'The test was really easy, because they only ask you about the map of Cape Town to see if you know where you will be working. The interview was also easy because they only wanted to know whether I had a smartphone and that I can speak English. They also asked about my past working experience as a domestic worker and I told them domestic work comes easy for us African women because we clean our houses everyday' (Busi).
The company expanded rapidly into new US domestic and international markets, at one point opening up operations in 30 cities in six months. On entering new markets, Homejoy offered heavy discounts to attract new purchasers. However, this also attracted many who paid the cheaper entry rate but did not return to purchase services at the full rate. Instead of addressing poor purchaser retention rates, the start-up prioritised high-growth numbers to please backers who had invested heavily in the platform. Ultimately, Homejoy could not generate enough profit to sustain the company.
Reports suggest the service quality was variable, but the company was unable to mandate worker training to support professional-level cleaning skills development and improve standards due to workers' independent contractor status.
As one report summarised, 'Sure, Homejoy was a convenient platform, but trust and quality trumped this convenient technology' (Madden, 2015).
working conditions. However, diversity is also evident. Successful on-demand innovations in developing countries in other sectors have adapted existing models to fit local infrastructure and access needs (Ramalingam et al., 2016). Similarly, our research found significant divergence in the operating models of on-demand domestic work companies, some of which are associated with positive outcomes for workers. Notably, companies find different and contextrelevant ways to overcome digital and financial divides as a route to engaging workers, which appears to open up on-demand economic opportunities to otherwise excluded groups. It is to this we now turn.
The expansion of a tech-savvy middle class has driven the expansion of on-demand domestic services. Companies assume a high level of digital ease among service purchasers - to go online to establish contact, to select their service (and in some cases, a specific provider), to pay for the service and to provide feedback on a website or mobile platform.
As we indicate in this section, the extent to which domestic workers are likely to be affected by these factors differs by country, and there is evidence that on-demand companies have developed their operating model to overcome some of the hurdles to access.
This so-called 'disruptive'39 modality requires a more sophisticated mobile handset as well as the ability to navigate mobile apps and a constant Internet connection.
Determining full causality requires more in-depth study but our very initial analysis using available data suggests that the extent to which these different modalities are in place in different countries can be linked to the levels of Internet adoption and education among the domestic workforce. Globally, the percentage of women using the Internet lags behind that of men for all age groups. Yet the number of women using the Internet is significantly increased among educated women - in a recent study across 10 countries, poor urban women with at least some secondary education were six times more likely to be online than those with lower levels of schooling (Jellema and Brudvig, 2015).
 SweepSouth asks applicants to supply personal information and details of their background online; it offers them the opportunity to 'gain access to hundreds of clients and work when and where you want to'.41 SweepSouth appears to require providers to own and be able to use a high-tech phone; one worker interviewed for this study spoke of an acquaintance who was interviewed but not accepted onto the platform because 'she does not own a smart phone but a more simple phone' (Busi).
 MyDidi 'sets up camps' in slum and other low-income areas to provide information about the company and recruit workers, and also gives a financial reward to workers who refer other friends or family directly: 'Some of our didis have their entire family working with us - mothers and sisters as domestic helps and brothers, husbands and fathers as drivers' (cited in Singh, 2016).
43 See: http://www.thehindubusinessline.com/todays-paper/tp-weekend-life/when-help-is-just-a-click-awayTo /article4654946.ece. In another article, the Managing Director speaks of being in talks with the government of Andhra Pradesh to raise Rs 50 crore (approx. $8 million in 2013 exchange rates) 'to involve it in the training process and recognition of domestic services in the state', cited in http://archives.deccanchronicle.com/130528/news-businesstech/ article/delivering-tailor-made-maids-your-doorstep.
While mobile money accounts remain rare - just 1% of adults globally have just a mobile account - they are important drivers of access to financial services in SSA, where 12% of adults have mobile accounts, 45% of them exclusively (Demirgu -Kunt et al., 2015). These services have expanded dramatically - 10 existed in 2008, which has expanded to 255 as of 2014, a nearly 16-fold increase (GSMA, 2015b: 15). As of 2014, these services operated across 89 countries (61% of the developing world), where they had resulted in just under 300 million mobile money accounts. The share of developing countries with mobile money services is lowest in the region of Europe Central Asia, at 14% and highest in SSA, where 81% of countries offer this service (Figure 8). The share of mobile phone connections linked to mobile money services is highest in SSA (23%), notably East Africa where it is close to 50% (ibid., 2015b: 25), with recent growth highest in Latin America and the Caribbean.
* Other types of interface include SIM Application Toolkit (STK), Interactive Voice Response (IVR) and mobile apps.
There is evidence that on-demand domestic work companies have recognised this exclusion and taken steps to overcome it. The founder of the MyDidi platform in India states, 'MyDidi's philosophy is to make the women financially independent', and the company opens a bank account for each service provider, with one worker quoted in the same article saying 'I know how to operate a bank account now and I'm no longer afraid of technology' (cited in Mehta Kadakia, 2016). While this appears a worthy effort, it remains to be seen how this works in practice, and whether opening bank accounts for all registered workers is scalable.
It is clear, then, that companies have attempted to develop their model to overcome digital divides, notably in terms of facilitating workers' access to on-demand work, although the cost of remaining connected to the platform remains a significant challenge. In some cases, they have also adopted financial services which offer promise to reach formally unbanked populations. However, the extent to which they have addressed the exclusion from the on-demand economy of the most marginalised populations remains unclear. Overcoming such barriers will be an important means of ensuring equitable access to the potential economic opportunities and any wider benefits that these platforms may offer, and as such should be an important focal point of future efforts to mature the on-demand economy in developing countries.
45 In Kenya, 4.6% of adults aged 15+ reported having a credit card in 2015, reducing to 2.3% among respondents from the poorest 40% of the population for the same period. Source: Global Findex (Global Financial Inclusion Database), World Bank.
De Stefano, 2016). Our evidence suggests the regressive effects of this are particularly acute in countries with relatively advanced policy and legal frameworks for domestic work, such as South Africa. In short, on-demand work can represent a deterioration in hard-won gains in domestic work legislation, regulation and protections afforded to workers (such as sick and paternity leave and pension contributions) as on-demand companies eschew employment-related responsibilities by invoking commercially-focused 'independent contractor' arrangements.
 Overall, workers are subject to low-income levels and security. Even when hourly platform rates for 'time worked' surpass legal minimum wages, the time and money workers dispense to get to and from 'gigs' leaves workers in precarious financial situations.
 Discriminatory gender norms are upheld, for example by platforms which invoke gendered imagery and language to maintain women's overrepresentation in the traditionally precarious and exploitative domestic work sector. Furthermore, as a result of digital divides, men access platform technology on women's behalf and can thereby control women's access to and decisionmaking in labour market engagement.
Solutions to the challenges posed by the on-demand economy will necessitate involvement from diverse interest groups, including on-demand firms, service purchasers, workers and their collectives or unions, and policy-makers (Dewan and Randolph, 2016). Companies should be foremost in actively driving up standards, notably by working to reverse the 'race to the bottom' in on-demand work (Zook et al., 2010; Isaac, 2014) and instead 'designing-in' to their models inclusion, empowerment and equality of opportunity and outcome.
Governments have a vital role to play in supporting the potential of on-demand platforms to facilitate access to economic opportunities, whilst protecting against the challenges posed by the on-demand economy to decent work. Efforts should be concentrated within a wider framework of domestic work formalisation, gender equality and women's empowerment, addressing the specific causes of women's digital and financial exclusion and women's overrepresentation in low-quality employment. Tackling intersecting inequalities and ensuring no one is left behind must also remain in clear focus. Indeed, the very existence of an on-demand economy for domestic work brings a range of inequalities into sharp relief, particularly in relation to women.
 Develop comprehensive, integrated legal and policy frameworks which respond to the complex reality of the on-demand economy for domestic work in different contexts, including domestic work intermediary and labour regulation, social protection, technology and innovation, digital and financial inclusion, and gender equality and women's empowerment. An urgent response to addressing regression in working conditions as a result of independent contractor models is a key priority.
o Avoiding implicit and explicit gender bias o Ensuring systems are accessible and easily understandable to all workers, including those with little experience of engaging with tax procedures.
 Ratify and fully implement ILO Convention 189 and associated Recommendation 201 as part of a focused effort towards the formalisation of domestic work.
 Adhere to ethical practices and protect the rights of workers, in line with the ILO Decent Work Agenda.
 Recognise worker organisations, including groups of independent contractors, and establish collective dialogue and negotiation procedures with them.
 Engage companies and governments in constructive dialogue on corporate practices which threaten social justice and women's empowerment. This may include assisting with recommendations on better working practices, as most on-demand companies are new and may not be experienced in labour rights issues.
 Assess how the entry of on-demand companies as an intermediary in the domestic services sector affects worker protections, including national labour and social provisions and the application of ILO Convention 189.
 Investigate the impact of technological advances and the changing world of work on women, including assessment of how they may regress social justice gains and progress made in the formalisation of the domestic work sector.
47 For further information on collaborative processes between domestic workers and researchers see Azzarello et al. (2014).
Aloisi, A. (2015) 'The Rising of On-Demand Work, a Case Study Research on a Set of Online Platforms and Apps'. Paper presented at the IV Regulating for Decent Work Conference, ILO, Geneva, 8-10 July 2015. Available http:// www.rdw2015.org/download [accessed 15/11/2016].
Azzarello et al. (2014) "We want to be the protagonists of our own stories!" - A participatory research manual on how domestic workers and researchers can jointly conduct research. Research Network for Domestic Worker Rights & Kassel University Press. Available: https://www.uni-kassel.de/einrichtungen/fileadmin/datas/einrichtungen/icdd/ Domestic_Workers/RN-DWR_Manual_part_research_2014_web.pdf [accessed 20/11/2016].
Berg, J. B. (2016) 'Income security in the on-demand economy: findings and policy lessons from a survey of crowdworkers'. Geneva: International Labour Office.
Chen, M. A. (2011) 'Recognizing Domestic Workers, Regulating Domestic Work: Conceptual, Measurement, and Regulatory Challenges'. Canadian Journal of Women and the Law, 23 (1): 167-184.
Cook, S. and Razavi, S. (2012) 'Work and welfare: Revisiting the linkages from a gender perspective'. Geneva: UNRISD.
European Foundation for the improvement of Living and Working Conditions (2015) New forms of employment. Luxembourg: Eurofound. Available: http://www.eurofound.europa.eu/publications/report/2015/working-conditions-labour-market/new-forms-of-employment [accessed 19/11/2016].
Fanggidae et al. (2016) 'On-Demand Transport Workers In Indonesia: Toward understanding the sharing economy in emerging markets'. In Just Jobs Network (2016) Transformations in Technology, Transformations in Work. Available: http://justjobsnetwork.org/transformation-in-technology-transformation-in-work/ [accessed 19/11/2016].
Hafkin, N. J., and Huyer, S. (2007) 'Women and Gender in ICT Statistic and Indicators for Development'. Information Technologies and International Development, 4(2), pp. 25.
Hertz, T. (2004) 'Have Minimum Wages Benefited South Africa's Domestic Service Workers?' Development Poverty Research Unit, University of Cape Town in association with Trade and Industrial Policy Strategies, Cornell University. African Development and Poverty Reduction: Forum Paper.
Huet, E. (2015a) 'What Really killed Homejoy-It couldn't hold on to its customers?' Forbes. [Online] Available: http://www.forbes.com/sites/ellenhuet/2015/07/23/what-really-killed-homejoy-it-couldnt-hold-onto-its-customers/#174949a1114c [accessed 23/10/2016].
ILO (2013b) Decent work indicators guidelines for producers and users of statistical and legal framework indicators. ILO manual, Second version. Geneva: ILO.
ILO (2016b) Social protection for domestic workers: key policy trends and statistics. Social protection policy paper: No. 16. Geneva: ILO, Social Protection Department (SOCPRO).
Internet.org (2016) 'State of Connectivity 2015: A Report On Global Internet Access'. Internet.org, [Online] Available: https://fbnewsroomus.files.wordpress.com/2016/02/state-of-connectivity-2015-2016-02-21-final.pdf [accessed 17/09/2016].
Kurmanath K.V. (2013) 'When Help Is Just a Click Away!' The Hindu Business Line. [Online] Available: http://www. thehindubusinessline.com/todays-paper/tp-weekend-life/when-help-is-just-a-click-awayTo /article4654946.ece [accessed 27/09/2016].
Manyika, J. et al. (2016) Connecting talent with opportunity in the digital age. San Francisco: McKinsey Global Institute. Available: http://www.mckinsey.com/global-themes/employment-and-growth/connecting-talent-with-opportunity-in-the-digital-age [accessed 18/11/2016).
Martin, C. J. (2015) 'The sharing economy: A pathway to sustainability or a nightmarish form of neoliberal capitalism?'. Ecological Economics, 121, pp. 149-159.
O'Sullivan, A., Shiffrin, S. M. (2003) Economics: Principles in Action. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Rogers, B. (2015) 'The Social Costs of Uber'. Law Review Dialogue 82:85, The University of Chicago. Available: https:// lawreview.uchicago.edu/page/social-costs-uber [accessed 20/11/2016].
Silberman, S. and Irani, L. (2016) 'Operating an employer reputation system: Lessons from Turkopticon, 2008-2015'. Comparative Labor Law & Policy Journal, Vol. 37, No. 3, pp. 505-541.
Van Zyl, C. (2015) 'Uber Seeks Changes to SA Transport Law'. Fin24 article. [Online] Available: http://www.fin24.com/ Tech/News/Uber-seeks-changes-to-SA-transport-law-20150902 [accessed 10/10/2016].
Watson, K. (2015) 'Maids in Mexico: Defending the rights of domestic workers'. BBC News article. Available: http:// www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-35113707.
Zook, M., Graham, M., Shelton, T. and Gorman, S. (2010) 'Volunteered geographic information and crowdsourcing disaster relief: a case study of the Haitian earthquake'. World Medical and Health Policy, 2(2)7-33.
This study was based on a qualitative case-study research design, with South Africa as the main case. It combined document analysis, four key informant interviews, two in-depth interviews, three life history interviews, a group interview and a focus group discussion. All the interviews except for three global key informant interviews were carried out during the South Africa country case study.
South Africa was purposively selected due to its emblematic socio-economic leadership among developing countries in sub-Saharan Africa, especially given its transition towards emerging market and lower middle-income country status.
South Africa was also of special interest due to its relatively high Internet penetration rates by developing country standards. Average penetration in developing countries is approximately 28%, whereas South Africa has an Internet penetration rate of 52% according to the ITU. Another characteristic that made South Africa a good candidate for this case study was its domestic worker situation. Domestic workers in South Africa have relatively high levels of education compared to other development country contexts. According to Oelz and Rani (2015), nearly three quarters of South Africa's domestic workers have a secondary education. In addition, South Africa has a fairly well-developed labour law environment with regards to domestic work, having recognised it as legitimate work in 1992, while constitutionalised labour rights in 1994 mandated a minimum wage regulation (Sectoral Determination Number 7 on domestic worker's conditions and minimum wage) and South Africa has ratified the ILO's convention 189.
Key informant interviews (informants) were administered with global experts in labour and technology, legal and policy frameworks, and domestic work. We purposively selected these global experts based on expertise relevant for this paper. Table 1 (overleaf) summarises the global informant respondents and interview schedules.
In-depth interviews were carried out with two domestic work service purchasers who had used either the Domestly or SweepSouth mobile application. Respondents were purposively selected based on their use of the apps. Table 2 (overleaf) summarises the in-depth interview respondents and schedule.
Three life history interviews were carried out with domestic workers. Life history interviews were used in order to get a fuller account of the socio-economic antecedents to the domestic workers' participation in domestic work, and how they ended up using the app. This approach added depth and context, allowing the study to map fuller trajectories of domestic work services and portraits of the providers. Respondents were initially purposively selected based on use of on-demand platforms to seek work. Snowballing was used to identify other respondents. Table 3 summarises the domestic worker life history interviews and schedule.
One key informant interview (Government official, South Africa) was conducted with an official from the South African Government's Department of Labour on 25 October 2016. The Department and official interviewed were purposively selected because of their in-depth involvement on labour issues, notably the legal and regulatory side. Attempts were made to interview other policy-makers and key informants from the Parliamentary Portfolio Committee on labour, but while they stated interest in the research, the targeted respondents could not avail themselves during the performance period of the study.
Two key informant interviews were sought from senior management teams in dedicated mobile app companies, Domestly and SweepSouth, which were the two major actors in this sector in South Africa at the time of the study. However, while an audience was granted with Domestly, the company preferred not to go on record for this study. The SweepSouth respondent went into labour and subsequent maternity leave at the time the interview was scheduled, and did not forward a replacement.
Focus group discussion 1 (FGD1): Carried out on the 25 October 2016 with three academics from the University of Western Cape's Social Law Project. The respondents were purposively sampled because of the Social Law Project's past work on domestic labour, and their ongoing study on technology within the domestic services sector. All participants were labour law experts and researchers on domestic work.
 Clarity of purpose: The researchers explained the purpose of the study to all participants, and gave clarifications where they were sought. Those who opted out, like the Domestly co-founders, had their wishes respected. Each respondent was provided with an information sheet, clearly written in easy-to-understand language.
 Remuneration for participants: No participants were given financial or other material incentives to participate or contribute to the study. All participants participated voluntarily without incentive or duress.
Development Progress is a four-year research project which aims to better understand, measure and communicate progress in development. Building on an initial phase of research across 24 case studies, this second phase continues to examine progress across countries and within sectors, to provide evidence for what's worked and why over the past two decades.