We are on the verge of massive change. Technological advances in credit assessment are poised to deliver huge impact by bringing formal, accessible, and affordable credit to hundreds of millions of aspiring middle-class consumers in emerging markets. At the forefront of this change is a burgeoning new field that we're calling "Big Data, Small Credit" (BDSC).
But these consumers may not remain "invisible" to formal lenders for long, thanks in part to their rising use of technology. Well over 650 million adults in Indiafour out of every fivealready have a mobile phone in their pocket, and most of these will be smartphones by 2020. More than 240 million Indians have access to the Internet and social media.2 Seven in 10 users of mobile broadband smartphone in India regularly stream videos on their phones; six in 10 use social networks.3 And every time these individuals make a phone call, send a text, browse the Internet, engage social media networks, or top up their prepaid cards, they deepen the digital footprints they are leaving behind.
Arjuna Costa is an investment partner at Omidyar Network, where he leads the firm's financial services investments in emerging markets.
Michael Kubzansky is a partner at Omidyar Network, leading the Intellectual Capital team, responsible for defining investment strategies and conducting market research and analysis that guide the firm's efforts to maximize scale and social impact.
Currently, in India alone, BDSC firms and their technologies have the ability to vastly expand the number of individuals who could gain access to formal credit by nearly 100-160 million new consumers.4 In the world's six biggest emerging economies China, Brazil, India, Mexico, Indonesia, and TurkeyBDSC has the potential to help between 325 million and 580 million people gain access to formal credit for the first time,5 creating a market opportunity that is too big to ignore.
The social impact also promises to be pro- found. BDSC offerings can spur the entry of many millions of aspiring middle-class consumers into the formal credit system. The conversion of a formerly "invisible" consumer into a "visible" and formal consumer not only accords dignity and respect but also opens the door to formal savings and insurance services, as well as financial management tools. It also allows low- and middle-income households to better capture opportunities and manage economic shocks.6 Indeed, the advent and rise of BDSC services serves to strengthen the continued growth story of the world's emerging marketsa mega economic trend of the 21st century.
The conversion of a formerly invisible consumer into a formal customer not only accords dignity and respect but also opens the door to formal savings and insurance services, as well as financial management tools.
Historically, there has been a marked disconnect between what developing-mar-ket consumers need and the relatively limited set of products and services that are available to them from formal financial services firms. Under the old dynamics and economics of bankingthe high costs of serving these consumers via traditional models, the relatively small transaction values involved, and the difficulty of knowing and assessing many of these consumers through traditional means (e.g., credit bureaus)very few of these products and services have been appropriate, affordable, or accessible to this huge but underserved market.
As a result, the amount of digital information generated by and about consumers on a daily basis has explodedcreating a steep rise in available "big data," a trend that has been well documented. CSC estimates that in 2020, data production will reach 35 zettabytesor 35 billion terabytes of datawhich is 44 times greater than the data produced in 2009.12 Seventy percent of this data is being generated by individuals, not companiesand not just in the developed world, but everywhere.
the aspiring middle-class consumers who are becoming digital and discoverable for the first time. As this intersection, new opportunities and new consumer value propositions are being created that have the potential to enable formal financial services to viably reach and better serve these suddenly "visible" and marketable consumer segments.
Extending loans in underserved markets has always been challenging. In the absence of easy-to-access information about the creditworthiness of unbanked or underserved individuals, lenders have had to go to great lengths to assess the likelihood of repayment. Indeed, the difficulty in collecting adequate predictive data on underserved consumers in a cost-effective manner has plagued credit providers for decades.
Recent research suggests that using advanced analytics and nontraditional, large data sets to assess credit worthiness offers a substantial cost advantage when it comes to providing credit in emerging markets. In countries where traditional data doesn't exist for the majority of consumers, it can dramatically lower the cost of identifying, assessing, and reaching underserved consumers. CGAP, building on McKinsey and Co. analyses, estimates that digital data analytics can reduce the marginal costs of providing a $200 loan in Tanzania by more than 40 percent.15 Assuming such cost savings are reflected in their offerings, these economics should further accelerate the affordability and uptake of the products and services offered by these companies.
Already, like Cignifi, many of these firms are developing the ability to assess the creditworthiness of previously unbanked consumers at a significantly lower cost compared to the brick-and-mortar banking industry cost. Several firms have suggested that their algorithms now outperform traditional credit scoring algorithms (such as FICO scores) in the markets they target, even though FICO and similar industry incumbent scores have had decades of refinement. As these algorithms continue to be tested across markets, segments, and services, their quality and accuracy will likely continue to improveand continue to bring down the costs of identifying and assessing good credit risks throughout the developing world.
binatory power is considerable. Unlike credit bureaus, which have longstanding data access agreements across the financial sector and elsewhere, BDSC firms face uncertainty about the continued availability of the data required to power their algorithms. This factor might force these firms to use primarily proprietary data from companies that currently own this data, or rely on data directly provided by consumers. It also suggests that BDSC companies can find a competitive advantage in reliably acquiring this data, and having the technology to process and clean (what is often messy) data at scale.
All of the BDSC providers we met with in the course of developing this report confirm that there is clear consumer demand for unsecured, formally provided, reasonably priced credit for short-term purposes. The main questions are, which previously unbanked consumers will prove to be early adopters, which will turn out to be difficult segments to reach and score, and how will their opinions and behavior change over time? Given that these are new consumer segments for formal lending, much remains to be learned about them. Indeed, that is the focus of the following two sections of this report.
Meanwhile, BDSC firms aren't the only ones evolving. The needs and wants of BDSC consumers are also changingand BDSC firms will need to be willing and able to adapt to ever-shifting consumer behavior and demand. Current consumers are already responding to and interacting with BDSC offerings in unanticipated ways. And not all consumers are happy with their loan experience. For BDSC to fulfill its promise of serving new "formal" consumer segments, it is critical to listen to the voice of the early adopter. This is what we turn to in the next section.
In the past, Rose has borrowed money from microfinance institutions, from a Chama (an informal cooperative that pools and groups savings), and from family and friends. Her loans have ranged from 1,000 KSH ($11) to 30,000 KSH ($335), and most of that money has been used for her business. Rose thinks carefully about who she borrows from, however. "I only borrow from people I know," she said. "We can even talk in Swahili or Luo [and they] live near me." She considers sharing certain private information a normal part of taking out a loan. But there are some categories she would never share, including information about her family's medical history, the websites she visits, and her emails.
Rose learned about M-Shwari from a TV advertisement and signed upbut she did not apply for an M-Shwari loan until she had an emergency. Her mother died and she needed money to pay for the funeral. "I first turned to my brothers and sisters, but nobody seemed to have money," she explained.
Rose said M-Shwari is the best lender in an emergency situation because it is simple and fast, unlike formal financial institutions. "Last holiday when I was on safari and ran out of gas, I borrowed 4,500 KSH ($50) from M-Shwari and fueled the cartas the bank was some distance away." Her recent loans have all been relatively small: 1,000 to 5,000 KSH ($12 to $56). Rose describes the M-Shwari experience as "smooth" because she has received all the money she wanted to borrow. She is happy with its services.
Rose is an example of a consumer once thought to be "invisible" to financial services providers who is now "digital and discoverable" thanks to BDSC. Indeed, she is a BDSC early adopterone of hundreds of thousands of individuals currently testing out these new products and services in emerging markets.
Despite growing literature about the rising BDSC field, very little has been captured about the individuals who use these services: aspiring middle-class consumers in developing markets who are now gaining access to needed short-term credit in new ways and more easily than ever before. In order to better understand this large and emerging consumer cohort, we commissioned in-depth research into their behaviors and preferences.2! This research featured individual interviews with more than 300 adults living in major cities in Kenya (a low-income country) and Colombia (a middle-income country). Seven in 10 were current users of BDSC services; the others were aware of and had access to these services but had not yet pursued them.
And this is only the beginning. If BDSC models become true mainstream models, eventually there will be more and more consumers unlike Rose in the mix, as the services expand to become more mass market and include additional, low-middle income consumer segments. In other words, widespread adoption of BDSC models should bring into the fold many consumers who are new to formal unsecured creditconsumers who have thus far remained "invisible" despite the rapid advances in financial technology and services. Their opinions have not yet been taken into account in building out and extending financial services ecosystems. As BDSC products gain traction, it is our hope that many millions of these consumers will also be brought into the fold.
Not surprisingly, given the digital nature of most of the products available, the vast majority of interviewees were younger and more educated than the national average (see Figure 4, next page). For instance, 70 percent of the Kenyans we interviewed were 34 years of age or under, and 91 percent had at least a secondary diploma or vocational training. In Colombia, those percentages were 68 and 97 percent, respectively.
Bringing these perspectives to light at an early stage of the BDSC field's evolution could help shape the commercial evolution of the emergent BDSC space and the policies established to support it. It might also contribute to the creation of a balanced architecture that encourages risk, innovation, and entrepreneurship, while also valuing privacy, ensuring protection, and enhancing trust.
Interviewees were frequently self-employed but also more stably employed compared to the general population and more savvy with respect to both financial service providers and mobile smartphone use: 50 percent of Kenyans interviewees (versus 6 percent in Kenya as a whole) and 78 percent of Colombians (versus 30 percent) owned a smartphone. They used these smartphones for a wide variety of transactions, from phone calls to social media to financial transactions. These findings are consistent with what one would expect among early adopters of a product that is both new and digital in nature.
Borrowing money was a critical aspect of the financial lives and financial behaviors of interviewees in both countries. At the moment, these early adopters are using BDSC products mainly as additional or supplementary tools for transactions where existing (formal and informal) tools fail, so they have quickly found value in the marketplace.
Even though Kenyan interviewees charted as relatively affluent and comfortable, one common aspect across both Kenyan and Colombian interviewees was that they had all applied for loans multiple times and taken out loans when they were granted. Nearly 60 percent of their borrowing was originally driven by the need to cover unforeseen expenditures and debt repayment. However, as Figure 5 shows, once they had borrowed, they spent nearly 80 percent of their loans on such needs. Kenyan consumers, in particular, still faced multiple occasions where they had short-term or emergency borrowing needsthe number one reason for borrowing among intervieweesand they viewed BDSC services like M-Shwari as far more convenient and responsive to those needs than any other option in the market.
volatility in incomes even at higher income segments.28 This was particularly so for the women who participated in our survey.
It is also worth highlighting that the ecosystem for credit and banking services is very different in Kenya than it is in Colombia. As Figure 6 shows, though informal lenders-including family members, friends, neighbors, and co-ops- dominate the Kenyan lending market, BDSC and mobile money services are the second most common source of loans. Indeed, three out of four interviewees borrowed at least part of the time via mobile channels. In Colombia, 85 percent had applied for loans from banks, reflecting a stronger preference for and trust in the formal financial system.30 Still, nearly six in 10 preferred to rely on other people, such as friends or family, for their loans.
However, whether BDSC services will deepen and expand in these markets will depend in large part on whether consumers grow to trust these services. In the long run, BDSC success will to a large extent be determined by whether consumers gain confidence in the way that BDSC lenders use their private information.
As Figure 7 shows, the consumers we interviewed ranked their financial history and income level, the content of online/mobile phone communication, medical histories, and family particulars as their most private information. They reported that they typically would only share this information outside their immediate, trusted circle of family and friends in the event of an emergency. Conversely, almost nine in 10 consumers across both countries had little or no concern about sharing their national identity documents in exchange for financial services, even though five in 10 ranked national IDs as private information.
their ability to exercise agency in financial transactions, especially in instances when they are making tradeoffs and decisions about sharing and using this data.
2. Most consumers are willing to exchange their dataeven their most closely held, confidential data in exchange for bigger or better loans.
In other words, for these emerging-market consumers, the availability of formal, convenient, unsecured, short-term, small-dollar credit was more important than privacy-which makes the BDSC value proposition very compelling. In and of itself, this consumer view of the tradeoff between privacy and credit is a significant finding, and comes at a key time in the development of this industry. Yet it is not entirely surprising, given that BDSC early adopters are more familiar with financial institutions and already expect that they will need to provide personal data in order to secure credit. Indeed, in Kenya, only 5 percent of all participants interviewed said they felt uncomfortable when a financial institution asked them to share their private information as part of their "know-your-customer" or KYC process.
Consumer concerns about privacyas well as their willingness to share confidential information for better financial servicesare intimately connected with the issue of trust. It is clear from our interviews that meaningful consumer trust in financial institutions in low- and middle-income markets takes time to build and effort to sustain. Key elements for building that trust include transparency; a strong reputation in the marketplace; a record of honoring previous commitments; endorsement from respected persons; and responsive, rewarding consumer relationships.
In the world of fast-paced and evolving digital financial services, where confidential information is frequently and quickly transacted, the assurance of privacy and the honoring of transparency are critical aspects of the relationship framework between clients and institutions, especially by newer firms that lack the brand heft of incumbents. Indeed, these two features are foundational, underpinning both trust and sustainability.
It has taken decades to bolster the accuracy and acceptance of traditional credit ratings; it took many years in the U.S. for FICO to become the mainstream score. Similarly, we must be patient as BDSC innovators figure out what data sources and analytics provide the best predictors of creditworthiness, and how best to deliver formal services to consumers.
We ask that regulators be bold enough to allow for experimentation and innovation in the service of unlocking new consumer markets and servicesand pragmatic enough to stay close to this innovation. This implies that regulators carefully weigh the unknowns and seek information before reacting, and develop "lean," appropriate, and smart regulation. Some regulators are already walking this path. A good example is the U.S. Consumer Finance Protection Bureau's introduction of Project Catalyst in 2013, an attempt to unlock innovation in several areas of consumer credit.41 In announcing its program, CFPB wrote: "In addition to establishing strong consumer protections and holding bad actors accountable, we also want to support marketplace innovation so that new and emerging products that are safe and beneficial for consumers can be developed. We do not want regulations to unnecessarily limit consumer-friendly developments".42 The UK's Financial Conduct Authority's ""Project Innovate"" is another example of regulation that works to introduce flexibility to the regulatory framework "to support innovation if this would bring benefits to consumers of financial services".43 In the emerging markets, Kenya and Tanzania both exemplify countries where regulators allow for experimentation at scale riding on the initial success of mobile money.
Most importantly, the market needs clear signals from the regulatory sphere about privacy frameworks and protections. Currently, regulatory uncertainty has incumbents and even data sources taking a conservative stance: few want to fall afoul of perceived privacy rules in the pursuit of what many of them see, at least initially, as a relatively small revenue stream. Clearly determining one way or another what is in or out of bounds is the single most important role regulators can play, irrespective of where the boundary line is drawn.
As they develop and scale, BDSC firms will require sustained access to consumer data through partnerships with the companies that own it. Most BDSC data sources, though generated by consumers, are not available currently in the public domain. Instead, they are "owned" by a private source, usually a technology company or data aggregator. Access to the full quantity and variety of data will help both innovators and financial service providers (who incur balance-sheet risk) figure out what data matched to which algorithm offers the greatest predictive power when it comes to creditworthiness. We urge data owners to provide continued access to innovators, so they can help to vastly expand BDSC services into new markets and increasing profitable opportunities.
We recommend financial service providers partner with innovators and help to refine and scale their innovations. Such partnerships will help them gain valuable insight into new consumer segments and potential product offerings that might have been more difficult or taken longer to develop on their own. Though revenue streams might be small at first, companies that identify emerging-market oppor-tunitieswhere massive populations of the aspiring middle class are willing to experiment with accessible, affordable, and easily testable products of the kind that BDSC providescould win valuable first-mover advantage, loyalty, trust, and consumer insight.
Ultimately, innovation, enterprise, and regulation should all be operating in service of the consumer. While regulation is critical, so too is the willingness of BDSC firms to proactively create and sustain a trust-enhancing architecture for consumers. With new consumer lending products aimed at new mass-market segments, the imperative to create trust becomes even more pronounced. BDSC firms (and their partners) that inspire this trust will position themselves to create enhanced, long-term, competitive advantage.
This may be more than just the right thing to do. First, it is probably a smart hedge against high-likelihood policy developments.45 Second, it sends a clear signal that gaining and maintaining consumer trust is important. Doing so proactively would likely provide a differentiated position in the short run and maximize shareholder value over the long run.
At Omidyar Network, we have made several investments in this promising sector and have strong conviction about its tremendous market potential and social value. Though these are early days, there is enough to suggest that hundreds of millions of mass-market consumers may not have to remain "invisible" to formal, unsecured credit for much longer. Indeed, BDSC early adopters are already pointing the way, indicating both a nuanced understanding of their preferences and transactions and an eagerness to engage in mutually beneficial relationships with BDSC firms.
We are enthusiastic about this new category that is rapidly taking shape. The promise is high, the economics make sense, and the prospective payoff in terms of empowering consumers to improve their lives is significant. We hope others will join us in advancing these potentially transformative innovations.
The authors thank the many individuals and organizations whose own work, insights, and comments greatly enriched and improved our thinking along the way.
We could not have accomplished this work without Jenny Johnston's endless well of patience with myriad redrafts, or her outstanding editorial skills . Oren Gabriel, Tat-Seng Chiam, Whitney Hooper and Aroon Vijaykar provided research and writing support to us in various capacities, which we are grateful for.
Finally, the authors would like to acknowledge and thank the pioneers in this space, both the incredibly innovative entrepreneurs that are creating these solutions and the early adopters who believe in them.
5 Ibid. Our estimates suggest that by 2020, these numbers are likely to more than double in size, as smartphone penetration and Internet use rapidly accelerate in emerging markets.
14 There is a small but growing body of literature on BDSC. Notable contributions to this report came from CGAP 2015 (see Note 16), focused on BDSC firms serving emerging markets, and by CFSI, which primarily highlighted the U.S. market (Wolkowitz, Eva and Parker, Sarah. 2015. "Big Data, Big Potential: Harnessing Data Technology for the Underserved Market" CFSI).
16 See note 4. As an example of another estimate, the founders of Lenddo estimate that there are 1.2 BN adults with digital footprints who do not have access to formal credit.
18 Cook, Tamara, and McKay, Claudia. 2015. "How M-Shwari Works: The Story So Far." Forum 10. Washington, D.C.: CGAP and FSD Kenya.
22 These numbers represent interviewees who responded positively to the following categorizations: "enough money for food and clothes, can save a bit"; "enough money to buy some expensive goods"; and "enough money to buy anything". InterMedia, 2014.
24 At this time, social networking sites are likely to be an extension of offline networks (used almost exclusively for general communication purposes), rather than an alternative to them.
www.asc.upenn.edu/sites/default/files/TradeoffFallacy_1.pdf. An example of a different line on privacy is in the recent EU ruling on the 'right to be forgotten', or the individual's right, under certain conditions, to ask search engines to remove links with personal information about them. See: http://ec.europa.eu/justice/data-protection/files/factsheets/factsheet_data_protection_en.pdf.
35 A reminder, that since we focused on current and potential BDSC users in Kenya and Colombia, our sample was deliberately unrepresentative of these countries' populations.
39 It also raises questions about a number of other issues that are currently being researched including algorithmic bias and exclusion.
44 These consumers have varying levels of trust in formal financial institutionsoftentimes low, at least initially, for certain types of providers. In Colombia, for example, only private-sector banks garnered trust from at least 50 percent of consumers. In Kenya, amid higher trust levels overall, mobile money providers garnered more trust than financial institutions.